Skip to main content
web
texts
movies
audio
software
image
logosearch
Search
upload
UPLOAD
person
SIGN IN
ABOUT
 
CONTACT
 
BLOG
 
PROJECTS
 
HELP
 
DONATE
 
JOBS
 
VOLUNTEER
 
PEOPLE
Full text of "Military-industrial complex : Eisenhower's unsolved problem"
See other formats
MILITARY-INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX: EISENHOWER'S UNSOLVED 

PROBLEM 


by 




)/lrS 


THOMAS JENKINS BADGER 



Bo A., George Washington University., 1949 



A MASTER'S THESIS 



submitted fn pa 1 ful 111b nt of the 



.'_-. -.- ... — -\-C 



MASTER OF ARTS 



Department of Political Science 



KANSAS STATE UNIVERSITY 
Manhattan, Kansas 



1965 



Approved by: 


Major Professor 


~ 


XOOl 
1105 

6<3 ACKHQWLEOGEMENT 

TO: Dr. Louis Douglas for suggesting the subject, offering continuous 
encouragement and valuable advice, and insisting upon a measure of scholar- 
ship. 

Or. Robin Higham for reading the manuscript, professional advice and 
suggestions. 

Dr. Joseph Hajda, who as the Major Professor, was responsible for the 
thesis and who tirelessly read and reread drafts, and who patiently pointed 
out weaknesses needing amplification, correction, or deletion. 

It Is not Intended to Indicate that these gentlemen concur with the 
entire thesis. They don't. The errors and misconceptions In the thesis 
are mine as well as the conclusions but without their assistance the thesis 
would be unacceptable as a scholarly work. If I could have followed their 
advice more Intelligently the thesis would be considerably Improved, but 
whatever merit this work may have the credit belongs to them. 



CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 


One hundred and sixty-eight years ago, the first President of the United 
States presented his farewell address to the country which he had served so 
well and which he, as much as any other person, had changed from a divided 
group of self-oriented states Into a cohesive nation. George Washington's 
principal advice to this young nation was to stay clear of permanent alliances 
with foreign nations. With a vast and growing territory to the west to settle} 
with an ocean protecting her eastern shore, and another ocean protecting her 
western shorej with a peaceful neighbor to the north except for one short 
interlude of a few years, culminating in the War of 1812 j with a much weaker 
neighbor to the south who would be forced to cede by conquest additional land 
for settlement to the west} with a foreign policy relying on the most power- 
ful navy In the world, that of Great Britain, with a favorable balance of 
power in Europe— the United States for over a century found it to her best 
interest to follow her first President's sage advice. A small group of 
nostalgic citizens believe It still to be the best policy. 

The Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans no longer offer adequate protection. 
Geographic distance between potential enemies has lost its protective importance. 
Salvos of intercontinental supersonic missiles with thermonuclear warheads can 
destroy the largest cities in a matter of minutes. The British Navy no longer 
protects the United States} rather the nuclear missiles of the United States 
now protect Great Britain. Two superpowers have transformed the political 
world. Each of them is seeking to convince the neutral and uncommitted nations 
that Its way of life, economically and politically, offers the best hope for 




each individual nation, as well as the entire world. The United States, as 
one of these two leaders, now Instead of avoiding alliances. Is 1n competition 
with the U.S.S.R., the other leader, spending billions of dollars annually to 
obtain additional allies and to bind her existing allies by new means and 
methods into stronger and more permanent alliances— economic, political and 
military. 

The United States continues to support the United Nations, in which all 
nations are potential members, hoping that this world organization would 
eventually produce, as was hopefully predicted by its most ardent founders, 
a world of peace governed by law with justice. The failure of the United 
Nations to produce effective aggrements or to fulfill its expected role made 
It necessary for the United States to shift its foreign policy from primary 
reliance on the United Nations to an interlocking system of alliances and 
multilateral treaties encircling the "Iron and Bamboo Curtains". 1 United 
States maintains a preeminent position In all these alliances. 

With planes traveling at 2000 miles per hour connecting world capitals 
in hours instead of days} with Instantaneous telephone and telegraph communica- 
tions between all countries} with basic diplomacy changed to special meetings 
including special emissaries and even heads of state) with a world-wide inter- 
locking economic structure) and, above all, with soma nations shifting their 
emphasis between the two poles for political or economic advantage; with other 


'united States is a member of OAS (Organization of American States) which 
includes all Central and South American states except Cuba) NATO (North Atlan- 
tic Treaty Organization) consisting of United States, United Kingdom, West 
Germany, France, Canada, Italy, Belgiun, Netherlands, Norway, Denmark, Iceland, 
Portugal, Luxembourg, Greece, Turkey; SEATO (South East Asia Treaty Organization) 
consisting of United States, United Kingdom, France, New Zealand, Australia, 
Thailand, Pakistan, Philippines; and CENTO (Central Treaty Organization) consisting 
of United Kingdom, Turkey, Pakistan, Iran with the United States pledged to co- 
operate for military defense. Bilateral treaties exist between United States 
and Japan, United States and South Korea, United States and Taiwan, United 
States and Philippines, United States and Australia and New Zealand. 


nations fostering alternatives to the policies of the United States and the 
Soviet Union, as France and China are doing; with still others creating 
special groupings such as the neutralist or African nations are doing to 
enhance their own special influence.— It remains increasingly impossible 
for any nation to live in isolation or even exist as a self sufficient nation. 
Under these conditions, which are the result of changes vast and unforeseen 
by the "founding fathers", another loved and respected President gave his 
farewell address to the citizens of the United States. The speech was 
directed to the citizens of the United States, but its background and impli- 
cations were dictated by the changes in world relationships. 

Sherman Adams says President Elsenhower was the greatest influence for 
peace in the world. President Eisenhower hoped that furtherance of world 
peace would determine his eventual place In history; consequently his 
greatest disappointment was that he could not say after eight years in office 
that permanent peace with justice was in sight. Nevertheless he felt that 
his greatest achievement was the avoidance of war in a hopelessly divided 
world, when, as he said, any display of weakness, moral or physical, could 
have meant the possible spread of nuclear war.' But above all, he seemed to 
think that his efforts in keeping the peace had also created a domestic 
problem that threatened the Individual liberties of Americans as well as the 
nation's traditional democratic processes. In his farewell address he saidt 

A vital element In keeping the peace Is our military establishment. 
Our arms must be mighty, ready for Instant action, so that no potential 
aggressor may be tempted to risk his own destruction ... 

Until the latest of our world conflicts, the United States had no 
armaments industry. American makers of plowshares could, with time and 


2 

.Sherman Adams, First Hand Report, p. 462. 

3 New York Tiroes, January VJ, i95T, p. 1. 


as required, make swords as well. But now we can no longer risk enter* 
gency improvisation of national defense} we have been compelled to 
create a permanent armaments industry of vast proportions. Added to 
this, three and a half million men and women are directly engaged in the 
defense establishment. We annually spend on military security more than 
the net income of all United States corporations. 

This conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large 
arms industry Is new in American experience. The total influence- 
economic, political, even spiritual—is felt in every city, every State- 
house, »/wy office of the Federal Government. We recognize the impera- 
tive need for this development. Yet we must not fail to comprehend its 
grave implications. Our toil, resources and livelihood are all involved; 
so is the very structure of our society. 

In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition 
of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military- 
industrial complex. The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced 
power exists and will persist. 

We must never let the weight of this combination endanger our liber- 
ties or democratic processes. We should take nothing for granted. Only 
an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of 
the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful 
methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper together. 

President Elsenhower was not the first to cite the danger of the growing 
military-industrial complex caused by the emphasis on military security. In 
1947 Hanson Baldwin warned of "the militarization of our Government and of the 
American state of mind." 5 H. D. Lasswell 6 In 1950 and Associate Justice 
William 0. Douglas'' in 1952, among many other serious and respected authors, 
wrote critically on various aspects of the military-industrial complex 
which was new to the United States and brought on by World War II but con- 
tinued since then, even growing and consolidating its position in American x 
society because of the continuation of the "cold war". Following the Presl- 


Sublic Papers of The President of the United States, Dwiqht D. Eisenhower. 
1960-19&1, P. 1037. See Appendix I for entire speech. 

SHanson Baldwin, "The Military Move In," Harper's Magazine, December, 1947, 
p. 481. 

°Harold D. Lasswell, National Security and Individual Freedom , New York, 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc., 1950. 

'William 0. Douglas "Should We Fear The Military?" Look Magazine, March 
11, 1952, p. 34. 


dent's speech there appeared among commentators, scholars, legislators, and 
writers of all types a growing number who wrote even more critically of 
military and Industrial leaders. There is substantial evidence of an In- 
creasing concern among thoughtful people that the effects of the military- 
Industrial complex are detrimental, if not actually changing or destroying 
the traditional American freedoms of our democratic society. Some members 
of the "anti-war" group** quote Eisenhower's speech as evidence of a milita- 
ristic state. As his speech is being quoted and mis-quoted and, further, 
1s the basis for this paper, it is necessary to know precisely what the 
President said. He made three principal points In the section of the 
speech on the military-industrial complex. First, that the need of an 
Immense military establishment and a large area industry is, to use his exact 
word, "Imperative". Second, that the potential for misplaced power exists 
and the Influence of the military-industrial complex is felt in every structure 
of our society—economic, political, and even spiritual. The Important word 
in the preceding sentence is "potential" . President Eisenhower didn't say 
that misplaced power exists, as many infer he did, but that only the potential 
exists. If he had said that misplaced power actually existed, It would have 
Indicted his entire administration and we, as Americans, would have expected 
him as President to have done something more than just call such a condition 
to the attention of the nation upon his retirement from public office. 


8 Robert A. Levine, The Arcr . Dabate , New York, Columbia University Press, 
1961. In this book Levine Identifies five groups of thought: the liberal 
left which is generally anti-war, the conservative right which is generally 
anti-ccranunlst, and the middle three groups which are both antl -communist and 
anti-war to different degrees. I have only used the terms antiwar and anti- 
comraunlst in this paper as the finer gradations are not necessary. 


President Elsenhower's recccmiendation to the problem was that In the 

councils of government, acquisition of unwarranted influence and misplaced 

power, must be guarded against whether sought or unsought. Further, he said 

that only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry could compel the proper 

meshing of the huge military machinery of defense so that security and liberty 

could prosper together. The President didn't elaborate on how the public could 

gain this knowledge. The purpose of this paper is to determine if Eisenhower 1 * 

thesis is correct by examining in successive chapters the main points he has 

/ 
raised in his speech. First, "the imperative need" will be examined from the 

viewpoint of the American public as well as its elected officials. Second, 
examination will be made of the "potential unwarranted influence and misplaced 
power" in both industry and the military. Particular attention will be given 
to evidence of changes in the political and economic conditions affecting the 
complex. Third, examination will also be conducted into the generally accepted 
theories of the operation of industry and the military which may be founded on 
misconceptions. Safeguards already within the democratic system which nullify 
or retard the potential rise of undemocratic tendencies in the complex will 
also be enumerated. As Eisenhower's recommendation is not considered suffi- 
cient to produce results an attempt will be made to show why it is untenable. 
Finally, a possible solution which could produce meaningful results and still 
be within the framework of United States democratic tradition is presented. 
One of the conclusions reached is that there is actually a third member 


of the military-industrial complex, namely the Congress of the United States. 
For at least (thr*e) reasons this thesis will seem weighted toward the military 
side: (1) as a result of the changed international position of the United 
States beginning with World War II, the military's place has radically changed 
from the traditional one of a relatively non-political, socially isolated. 




even distrusted group to one of political Influence, prestige, and respect} 

(2) In the scholarly literature dealing with the complex more attention Is 
paid to the military than to the other two members, the Congress and industry} 

(3) the author is a soldier who Is personally involved in the military point 
of view and is more familiar with military sources. The latter reason may 
produce an unconscious bias as the author views the military from the inside 
of the organization while he views the Congress and industry from the outside. 

The Congressional Record and Congressional quarterly have been used to 
find out what Congressmen have said on this and related subjects. The words 
of military scholars, industrial economists, social and political scientists 
have been studied. As the subject is a current one and the President specif- 
ically said the danger was potential, the New York Times, Kansas City Star 
and Times, Newsweek, U. S. News and World Report and Time have been read daily 
or weekly, as the case may be, from March \$(M to March 1965, and the material 
evaluated. To get the viewpoint of the military and Industry, the author has 
reviewed each issue of The Journal of the Armed Forces , Array, Airpower, Aviation 
Week, Business Week, and Missiles and Rockets for the same period. Additional 
trade and leading scholarly magazines In political science, economics, and 
sociology have also been consulted. 


CHAPTER II 

IMPERATIVE NEED 

The traditional reason for a national military establishment Is protection 
from an external threat. The United States has only one external threat in 
the world today and that Is the U.S.S.R. Beyond doubt the Russians could 
devastatingly cripple the United States, in a matter of hours at most and 
probably in less time, by a superstate, thermonuclear missile attack. The 
only defense the United States has against such an attack Is the assurance of 
the U.S.S.R. that this type of attack would automatically trigger a retaliatory 
one which would bring as much or more damage to itself than the U.S.S.R. could 
possibly accomplish against the Unitod States by Instigating a thermonuclear 
exchange. 

The President, Congress, and the American People 

Congress is responsible to provide for the common defenses to raise, sup- 
port, and appropriate money for the military establishment. The President is 
Commander-in-Chief of the military forces and the only elected official to 
represent all the people. Except for a few vocal members of the anti-war 
group who feel that the possibility of nuclear war Is so awesome that the 
United States should destroy its own weapons and attempt to gain world 


'Herman Kahn, On Thermonuclear War, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 
I960. This book gives a detailed and thorough discussion on all phases of 
nuclear war, including minimum and finite deterrents, first strike capabili- 
ties, preattack mobilization base, limited war, and balance of terror. It has 
been criticized that it is an attempt to make thermonuclear war acceptable. 
This is not quite accurate, but it Is easy to see how an "anti-war'- advocate 
could reach this conclusion. Kahn's main thesis is that the Unitod States is 
not preparing adequately for any type of nucl >ar war. The book is valuable 
for a student who desires to understand all the alternatives that must be con- 
sidered In reaching a national policy that will assure survival In case of a 
nuclear war. 


leadership through moral suasion and example, the goal of American nuclear 

2 
superiority over the U.S.S.R. undoubtedly has overwhelming public support. 

The 1964 Presidential Campaign daily provided evidence that this last 
statement Is true. On a single day (October 12, 1964) Senator Barry Gold- 
water made three separate speeches attacking the Johnson Administration for 
(1) being "soft on Communism," (2) eliminating manned bombers to the detriment 
of United States military strength, and (3) destroying NATO confidence by re- 
fusing use of tactical nuclear weapons by NATO commanders under specified con- 
dittons without President Johnson's approval. President Johnson immediately 
answered all three charges, as he had many tlicss before. His sensitivity on 
the subject of United States military strength not only brought Defense 

Secretary HcNamara in particular, but the military civilian chiefs as a whole, 

4 
into politics to a degree never before witnessed In United States history. 

Political commentators of Newsweek were typical in assessing the war and peace 

issue as the most decisive In the campaign. Both candidates emphasized peace 

through strength with Goldwater arguing for a 'tauscle-flexing" pursuit, while 

Johnson said "the key to peace is to be found in strength and the good sense of 

the United States." 5 In addition, Johnson was Insisting that "his opponent 

makes 'reckless' accusations about America's military power" and that "the 

6 
Democrats have 'vastly Increased' American power." 


Ibid., and Robert A. Levine, The Arms Debate, p. 285. Only the student, 
the policy makers and military ere interested In the various degrees of nuclear 
deterrent. The public as a whole is Interested in assurance of survival and 
responsibility in handling nuclear weapons. Levlne and Kahn (See Note #1) 
provide a summary of the entire spectrum of nuclear warfare with detailed ram- 
ifications. 

^Kansas City Times, Associated Press Dispatches, October 12, 1964, pps. 
1,2,12. 

^Journal Memo, Journal of The Armed Forces , October 24, 1964, p.4. 

f'The Peace Issue," Newsweek , November 2, 1964, p. 24. 
Journal of The Armed Forces , Joe. cit. 


10 


The Republican and Democratic platforms since 1948 have called, as a 
minimum, for an adequate defense which, to Africans, means a defense 
establishment superior to that of the U.S.S.R. In all respects. In I960 
Kennedy argued, when campaigning for the Presidency, that the United States 
was becoming a second-rate military power under the Republicans and was 

Q 

preparing for the wrong kind of war, at the same time Nixon was saying, 
"We must not cut the defense budget. It must remain and Increase if we are 
to remain a free and the most important nation in the world*"' Johnson, 
on becoming President, said he was going to follow President Kennedy's military 
policy which the latter stated as, "There is no discount price on defense. 
The Free world must be prepared at all times to face the perils of a global 
nuclear war, limited conventional conflict, and covert guerrilla activities." 
President Johnson specifically sale 1 , "We shall keep the peace by maintaining 
both the strength of our arms and the initiation of our diplomacy." 11 And in 
his budget message to Congress on January 21, 1964, he said further, "We have 

chosen not to concede our opponents' supremacy in any type of potential 

12 
conflict, be It nuclear war, conventional warfare, or guerrilla conflict." 

Congress, as a whole, has willingly supported the military goals of the 
administration, whether it be Republican or Democratic. Although some Congress- 
men have criticized the size of defense appropriations, individual projects and 
poor management, and the ease with which defense appropriations gain legislative 


Platforms of the Democratic Party and tha Republican Party, 1964, U. S. 
Govergnant Printing Office, p. 56. 
rf "Newsweek, October 3, i960, p. V». 
.^Richard M. Nixon, The Challenges We Face , p. 8. 

1 John F, Kennedy, Speech at Ccxmond and Ganeral Staff College, Fort Leaven- 
worth, Kansas, Hilitary Review, July 1963, p. 66. 
* ,,1-yndon B. Johnson "On The Offensive For Peace", Army. December 1963# p. 27. 
12 Jack Raymond, Power At The Pentagon, p. 6. 


11 


approval in comparison with other measures, no Congressman gained national 
recognition in the 1964 campaign by advocating a reduction in defense. Instead 
the reverse was true. Congressmen seeking reelection stood for a defense 
establishment second to none. Foreign military aid is supported without 
question by Congress while economic foreign aid programs backed by the ex- 
ecutive branch only pass Congress with deductions, usually after personal 
appeal for passage by the President. A study of defense appropriations since 
1948 reveals that Congress (which supposedly knows best the desires of its 
constituents), in spite of several cuts in selected areas, has had only one 
overall effect on the military budget and that is to increase it. In fact, 
the Chief Executive has several times impounded appropriated money and refused 
to use it as Congress desired. ^ The actions of Congress have produced more 
defense but its actions have also produced duplication or pluralism. One 
example of this effect is the 19&4 debate between Senator Goldwater and 
Secretary McNamara. Goldwater questioned the reliability of missiles. Actually 

he was not against missiles but wanted additional money to produce sizable 

14 

quantities of the B-70, or another intercontinental manned bomber.' Air Force 

Chief of Staff, General Curtis LeMay, said that he would accept present 
missiles even if they were less reliable than they are, but he supported 
Goldwater before Congress by saying it would be dangerous for the United States 
to place total reliance on missiles. Both are for development and procurement 
of a bomber to replace the B-52 and B-58.' Congress has consistently supported 
appropriations for a diversified military establishment that will maintain 
United States military superiority in all fields and with all possible weapons 


'^Samuel P. Huntington, The Common Defense , p. 41, 
^U. S. News and World Report , March 9, 1964, p. 28. 

1 Catherine Johnsen, "New Bomber Funds Win Early Approval," Aviation Week 
& Space Technology , February 24, 1964, pps. 26-27. 


12 


systems, Including airplanes, missiles, submarines, aircraft carriers and 
any equipment it takes for all types of special forces. The actions of 
Congress point to the conclusion that this pluralistic, diversified type of 
defense is what the country needs and wants. 

Scientific Superiority 

Nuclear weapons superiority is at present a clear-cut aim of the United 
States. Solitary possession of the atomic bomb after World War II gave the 
United States an Initial sense of security which to the American public was 
dismayingly destroyed when Russis exploded an atomic bomb in 1949* followed 
by a hydrogen bomb in 1953, and lastly when the achievement In space pro- 
pulsion demonstrated by "Sputnik" in 1957 which confirmed a lead in space 
propulsion which the United States 8 years later still has not overtaken. As 
each scientific success of the Russians has become known, the leaders of the 
nation and the American public have demanded an effort by the military-industri- 
al complex (augmented by scientific research and development) which would not 
only equal but surpass the Russians. National pride, while hard to measure, 
has also abetted such an effort. 

Undetectable chemical and biological weapons, more powerful thermonuclear 
weapons, predictions of cobalt, neutron, and more sophisticated hydrogen 
weapons, manned orbiting space ships carrying atomic bombs—all already on the 
future scientific time tablej only accentuate the imperative need for the United 
States to stay ahead of the U.S.S.R. in scientific progress as far as It relates 
to military supremacy. True, thore Is a minority point of view that Is growing 
larger, that exploration of spaca, not having an immediate military value, 
should be curtailed. However, at the present time there is no absolute 


13 


agreement on which space projects should be military and which strictly 
scientific and civilian. Congress has not cancelled any budgeted space pro- 
jects; but, by cut-backs In appropriations. It has delayed some of them. A 
persuasive point of view Is the latest statement of the Chairman, Senate 

Committee on Foreign Relations, J. W. Full right that the war on poverty and 

16 
education and welfare programs are more important than a "voyage to the moon." 

The military has been unsuccessful in its attempts to control all space ex- 
ploration; rather, it has supported government space exploration by NASA 
(National Aeronautical Space Administration) and, In return, received priority 
whenever a project is recognized as having a definite military application. 
A Russian space success which appears to have a military application will 
undoubtedly have Congress appropriating additional money and applying the 
pressure not only on the military and industry, but also on NASA, to equal or 
surpass Russian claims to success which are not necessarily justifiable. 
Congress, in the present climate of opinion, will support all proven needs for 
the military's scientific demands. 

But space developments are not the only areas in which military scien- 
tific progress is being made. Scientific progress is being made in all mili- 
tary fields. This progress runs the entire gamut of conventional weapons, 
missiles, submarines, planes, helicopters, munitions, and many others. In 
fact scientific progress is making military hardware obsolete, in crany cases 
even before it is used. The imperative need of a huge military establish- 
rosnt and an industrial base to support it definitely includes scientific 


,6 Kansas City Star , Associated Press Dispatch, April 6, 1964, p. 9. 


14 


superiority in research and development in all fields, including nuclear. 
World Leader and Foreign Policy 

The United States is the accepted leader of the so-called free world or 
anti -communist nations. The foreign policy of the United States is that 
allies are indispensable. This policy stresses keeping the alliances encir- 
cling the "iron curtain" militarily and economically functional, but also con- 
tinually strengthening them wherever possible. By bitter experience, it was 
learned that United States leadership in these alliances could be maintained 
only by forces-in-being. Industrial capacity is no longer decisive in keeping 
allies or deterring aggression. 

Immediately after World War II the U.S.S.R. did not demobilize her Army 
as did the United States, with the result that Eastern Europe was sealed off 
and became a Soviet preserve. Secretary of State George Marshall at Moscow 
and Secretary of State James Byrnes at Berlin tried to modify or alleviate 
these actions by negotiation, but they could not gain any concessions, nor could 
they remedy or weaken the Soviet domination. The accepted reason for this 
failure was, as stated by both Secretaries, simply that they had no negotiating 
power. Marshall found his basis for negotiating in China in 1947 even less 
rewarding, and this with a much weaker foe. Coincident with Communist expan- 
sion in Europe and China were the actions of the U.S.S.R. in the Security Council 
of the United Nations where United States proposals on a military force to main- 
tain world peace or on control of nuclears, whether realistic or unrealis- 
tic, were met only with successive "nyets" by the Soviet Union. China was lost 
to the Communists in 1948; only a military effort in 1947 by the United States 


''Huntington, op_. cit ., p. 40. 


15 


saved Turkey and Greece from becoming Communist. The Korean War from 1950 
to 1953 emphasized the bipolartzation of the world between the two protagonists- 
— U.S.S.R. and United States and the formation of NATO in 19*»9 has been given 
credit for stopping Soviet expansion In Europe. The Americans learned the 

lesson well that Stalin's remark to Franklin D. Roosevelt, "How many divisions 

18 
has the Pope got?" was not a facetious remark on the part of the Soviet leader. 

The international successes of the United States in stopping Communist expansion 

have been accomplished because military power was ready for action and used 

while the failures can be attributed to the lack of sufficient military power 

or failure to use available force. The only answer has been to increase the 

size of our own forces as well as those of our allies. 

Samuel P. Huntington, one of the most competent scholars writing on the 

military today, says that since World War II the dominant goal of United States 

foreign policy has been national security, with the aims of national security 

having a veto on every foreign policy decision and foreign policy now even often 

defined as a branch of national security policy. ' There is no doubt that 

national security policy and foraign policy are inextricably intertwined. And 

the consequences of separate forsign and national security policies would only 

produce confusion and lack of direction at the national level and also among 

■"I 

our allies. . Gone ere the days when a Secretary of State can act as Henry 

Stimson did in implementing the policy of non-recognition of Manchoukuo without 

20 
even notifying the Navy Department, or as Secretary Cordell Hull did when he 

refused to read the Army plans for occupying Iceland because (as he said) if 


18 
C. L. Sulzberger, "When The Pope Was Infallible," New York Times, Hay 16, 
191*8,0. 3*». 

^Huntington, op. cit., p. 426. 

20 Walter Mil lis, Harvey C. Mansfield, Harold Stein, Arms and Tha State, 
p. 20. 


16 


he didn't know them he wouldn't be embarrassed before Congress. And 
similarly, gone are the days when the State Department could abdicate its 
responsibilities, or be forced to do so by a President, and allow General 
Joseph Stilwell to supplant the appointed ambassador to China Clarence Gauss 
1n all World War II dealings with Chiang Kai-shek or when determination of 
access routes to Berlin or the occupation of Prague and Berlin would be con- 
sidered as strictly military decisions to the entire exclusion of the political 

22 
point of view. The NSC (National Sacurity Council) provides us with the 

coordinating organization, whethar we think it Is functioning to its highest 
potential or not, where foreign policy-military security problems are discussed 
and formulated from both political and military points of view. 

>A11ies have another significant effect on the military-industrial complex. 
Concentration on nuclear weapons as the only means of conducting warfare 
produces one kind of military establishment. If the United States would adopt 
this strategy, then the military establishment could be limited to ICBM's 
(intercontinental ballistic missiles), antimissile defense against Soviet 
nuclear missiles, and civilian defense structures to protect cities and the 
non-combatant citizens of the United States. But the type of military establish- 
rasnt which places emphasis on a single type of warfare—that of massive re- 
taliation as advocated by the Eisenhower admlitistratton-^fai is to protect all 
our allies and, of course. Is unsatisfactory to them, as the reason for 
alliances is mutual security. In some cases, as In Vietnam and Laos, over- 
whelming nuclear superiority fails even to deter the opposition. Allied 


2 | Ibid. , pps. k9, 51. 
22 Tbld., pps. 95, 129, 132. 


17 


troop concentrations In Germany have certainly Influenced Soviet policy. 
Again, having available troops to move to Lebanon and Cuba changed conditions 
in these two countries. Even in these areas where a war, 1f started, might 
well escalate to a thermonuclear war, conventional forces are considered vital 
and probably more useful as a shield (if anything else). The United States, 
In order to stop the spread of Communism and to protect allies, is committed to 
any possible type of warfare commensurate with that used by Comnunists any 
place in the world.] 

C. Wright Mills bluntly states that only a great nation can threaten 
decisive warfare and that military power determines the political standing 
of nations. 23 The United States is a great nation and to maintain its preeminent 
position in world councils must have commensurate military power. Arthur 
Schlesinger, Jr., has expressed the same idea in a more subtle and interesting 
way and indicates the reason this country must have a diversified military 
posture in order to have a viable foreign policy with military policy subor- 
dinate to foreign policy. 

It is now evident that military power becomes the master of foreign 
policy not when there is too much of it but when there is too little. It 
is the absence or lopsidedrtess of armed strength that allows the military 
situation to run foreign avfcirs. When our military policy is inadequate 
to meet a variety of crise:;, our foreign policy must become constrained, 
rigid, and inflexible. Balanced and ample military power is consequently 
the price we must pay for freedom of national action. 

American diplomatic prestige and leadership require that the United States 

be recognized as the superior military force in all types of warfare, whether 

strategic missile warfare, conventional warfare with large troop concentrations. 


23 C. Wright Mills, The Powar Elite , p. 85. 

2^Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., "Military Force« How Much and Where?," 

-■-.-, Rcnoriar, August \k, 1953, p. 13. 


18 


or small troop concentrations of the guerrilla or special force type, and 
whether on land, or sea, or In the air. The imperative need for a huge 
military-Industrial complex is complicated and enhanced by the United States 
national policy of world leadership, by the necessity for allies in all parts 
of the world, and by the requirement to stop the spread of Communisra. The 
United States cannot concentrate on one type of military force, but must 
become proficient in all types (of warfare). This has one principal effect—that 
is enlargement and profusion of the military establishment and the industrial 
structure to support it. 


Economic Necessity 


& 


[Defense Industry Is an imporUnt factor in the economy of the United 
States. As it Is doubtful that the defense budget will increase in the near 
future without a Soviet political or military offensive, and since, for the 
moment, the U.S.S.R. is engaged in domestic problems and in maintaining Its 
leadership In competition with China in Communist-controlled countries, only 
a decrease In the defense budget need bo considered. Any sudden, large 
adjustments downward In defense expenditures would drastically affect the Amer- 
ican economy. That this is true can be proved by a few facts. Defense, if it 
can be considered a single industry, Is admittedly the leading one today. 25 
With assets three times the combined assets of U. S. Steel, Metropolitan Life 

Insurance, American Telephone and Telegraph, General Motors, and Standard Oil 

26 
of New Jersey; with 22 out of 50 states depending heavily on defense 


X 


5 It has become common to speak of Defense Industry as one industry similar 
to the auto industry. This Is not accurate; the defense tndustry is, according 
to Jack Raymond in his book, Power At The Pentagon, "a hybrid arms industry, 
financed by the government, controlled by tha covernraent, but labeled free enter- 
prise, is one of the characteristics of the military-industrial complex.," (p. 166) 
2o Fred J. Cook, The Warfare State, p. 22. 


19 


spendingj 2 ? with space (which has many military Implications), now the second 
Industry In the United States after having passed steel and steel products In 
1963, and at Its present rate of growth about to surpass the leading auto 
industry within the next two years; 28 it can be expected that over $20 billion 
in new contracts will be negotiated through the Defense Department annual ly 2 ^ 
for the foreseeable future, excluding the contracts NASA will negotiate. 

Defense contracts are also important internationally. As the world leader 
in the production of military equipment, the United States is a foremost advo- ' 
cate for the standardization of all military equipment for our allies. This is 
without doubt a desirable military objective. With all nations using the 
same equipment, Interchangeability of not only equipment but of spare parts is 
possible and maintenance, repair, and supply depots can not only be integrated 
but become much more efficient. This is important as part of our military 
policy, but selling military equipment to our allies is also a significant I 
factor in maintaining the balance of payments in a favorable ratio. 30 

Only one other related fact is necessary So show the importance of 
defense industry to our present economy. Presidentj.*eht»»ei{js advocating a 
war on poverty. With 5 billion unemployed, is the President or Congress 
willing to sacrifice the leading industry of the United States? Would the 
President or Congress allow a prolonged strike in the auto industry, let alone 
its elimination or partial elimination? The concern of the President and the 
country over a strike in the steel, rail, or any other large industry should be 


2 ?Ibtd ., p. 176. 


zo Wi!Ham Beller, "Missile/Space Industry Rapidly Outdistancing Automo- 
tive," Jj1ssJJes_andRockets, October 28, 1963, p. 22. 
fgCook, loc.'cTt: 
JU "Have TSJn, WTl Sell," Tha tow Republic, June 5, 1965, p. 5. 


20 


sufficient proof that the acceptance by the public or government officials of 
the elimination of the defense industry or even of a large-scale reduction in 
it would be unacceptable. Defense spending will continue until unemployment 
decreases or until defense industry can be shifted to other pursuits, which 
will take time. Defense spending will probably increase if even a slight 
depression appears as it did under Eisenhower in 1958.31 /\ s unsympathetic 
a commentator of the present Administration as David Lawrence says that it 
would be disastrous to our national economy if the arms budget was cut suddenly, 
although he, like many others, including respected economists and industrialists, 
thinks it could be cut gradually, but only after detailed plans were made and 
effected to shift the economy with a corresponding cut in taxes.' The 1964 
cut in taxes stimulated business. There is evary reason to believe that 
additional cuts would have the same beneficial effect upon the national economy. 
Defense spending only represents 10% of the GNP, so 90% has to come from other 
areas. Defense spending does not enter into consumption and is, on the whole, 
a wasteful method of government expenditure to produce prosperity. In 1945-46 
there was transferred more than twice as much in resources and manpower from 

war to civilian employments as would be involved in complete disarmament now 

33 
without disruption of the economy. There are many suggestions and methods 

to reduce the size of the military-industrial complex. Many economists believe 

with Kenneth E. Boulding that If the government would spend as much on research 

and training for human welfare as Is spent on defense that the results would be 


jj Huntington, op_. cit., p. 276. 

3 2 David Lawrence, "I?- - -", U. S. News and World Report , October 21, 1963, 

"Donald G. Brennan, ed.. Disarmament and National Security, p. 156. 


21 


34 
dramatic* Nevertheless to cut the military budget will not be a simple 

task and will at best require detailed planning for conversion. 

Conclusion 

According to McNamara, the President and Congress are providing the 

means to fill this imperative defense need of the American public. He 

summarizes the situation pragmatically in this fashion: 

The U. S. has 750 intercontinental ballistic missiles on the pads as 
against less than 200 Soviet ICBM's. There are 192 Polaris missiles de- 
ployed, in contrast to a far fewer number of Russian sublaunchad missiles 
which have only one-third as much range and must be fired from the sur- 
face. The U. S. has 540 strategic jet bombers on 15 minute alert, while 
Russia has no more than 120 heavy bombers capable of hitting U. S. tar- 
gets on two-way missions. 35 

There are wide differences in the various estimates by economic experts 

of the GN? (Gross National Product), industrial capacity, per capita income, 

and the amount of money spent on defense by the U.S.S.R. as compared to the 

United States. These estimates place the U.S.S.R. GNP at a high of one-half 

to a low of one-fourth of that of the United States. 3" And the amount being 

spent on defense in the U.S.S.R. ranges from • low of around $15 billion 

annually, which is identifiable, to a high of a much larger amount which is 

hidden in the Russian budget, but no experts believe the Russian defense 

budget reaches the $50 billion being spent annually by the United States.''' 

General Thomas Power, United States Air Force, says Russia spends 40% of its 

GNP on defense while the United States has been 'taoving away from Qheifl" and 

only spending 10% of her GNP on defense. The average per capita income in 


^Ibid ., p. 161. 

3 'William J. Coughlln, "The Philosophy of Chance," Hissi1e3 and Rockets , 
April 20, 1964, p. 46. 

3°Henry Rowen, Study Paper No. 18, "National Security and the American 
Economy in the 1960's» 86th Congress, 2d Session, p. 1. 

J/Charles H. Hitch, "National Security Policy as a Field for Economics 
Research," World Politics, April I960, p. 437. 

3 John G. Hubbell, "Tough Tommy Power— Our Deterrent-In-Chief," The Reader's 
Digest. May 1964, p. 75. 


22 


39 
the U.S.S.R. 1s around $858 compared to $2570 for the United States as of 

1962. Although Russia's per capita incase is gaining compared to that of 

the United States, Russia's industrial production ranges from only 30% to 

41 
50% of that of the United States. These figures Indicate that there is no 

economic reason why the United States cannot stay superior to the U.S.S.R. 

militarily If the desire to use her wealth for this purpose continues. In fact, 

the United States spent 40% of her GNP for defense In World War II compared to 

an estimated 10% In 1963; that the United States could return to this type 

42 
of economy if necessary for national survival is not questioned. 

Even though United States can economically support its own military security 
and can provide leadership based on military power. It is a mean goal for a 
great nation* Peace, security, and justice for all nations Is certainly a 
higher goal for a truly great nation. This is actually what the United States 
is striving for. President/Johr,son(has several times reiterated that peace 
is the goal of the United States; certainly] President Kennedy and President 
Elsenhower both(shared this goal. In fact, a world of law in which the United 
Nations would be influential In settling international disputes is a cardinal 
policy of the United States. 

Political beliefs and ideas in America change slowly. The United States 
is a conservative nation. Our form of government, particularly the legtsla- 


^Abram Bergson, The Great Economic Race, Challenge, March 1963, p. 6. 

™T ha World Almanac, New York World Telegram & Sun, p. 748. 

^'"Interview with Or. G. Warren Nutter," U. S. News and World Report, 
April.13, 1964, p. 53. 

^Charles J. Hitch, "National Policy as a Field for Economics Research," 
World.EoHtics, April I960, pps. 438 and 440. 

''John R. Cauley, "Peace Pledge by L.B.J. ," Kansas City Star, Dec. 17, 1963, 
p. 1, and "Johnson Pledges Drive For Peace," New York Tiroes . Dec. 15, 1963, 
p. 21. 


23 


tive branch, with its preeminent interest localized to its members' state 
or district, is not conducive to rapid and radical changes. A strong military 
establishment has become, since World War II, a firmly-rooted goal considered 
absolutely necessary by both the Congress and the President of the United States, 
as well ^.5 a great majority of the American people. Although dissenting voices 
are being raised, mainly as to the degree of defense spending and its deleteri- 
ous effect on American democratic institutions, they have not been effective 
to date in changing the consensus that absolute security without qualification 
is essential and that the best way to maintain security, and for that matter 
peace, is through an overwhelmingly superior military establishment. If the 
thinking of Americans is to be reoriented toward peaceful solutions that are 
not based on military power, it will have to cain vocal advocates in our press 
as well as with Congressional leader*, and particularly, it must obtain a grass 
roots acceptance probably starting in our educational institutions. Eisenhower 
is correct in that the majority of Americans end their elected officials 
consider a huge military establishment with the industrial base to support 
it to be an imperative need for national security, national existence, world 
leadership, international prestige, protection of our allies, and, while not 
universally accepted, most politicians believe defense industry an imperative 
to maintain our present national economy, and economists believe any reduction 
in defense spending must be done gradually over a long period of time after 
detailed planning. 


2k 


CHAPTER III 

POTENTIAL MISPLACED POWER AND UNWARRANTED INFLUENCE 

There seems little doubt that a consensus in the United States supports 
the need for an immense military-industrial complex. The next question to 
be analyzed is the President's contention that the total influence of this 
complex is felt economically, politically, and spiritually in every city, 
state, and office of the federal government and that this Influence represents ' 
a potential for misplaced power that is inimical to democratic processes. 
First will be presented evidence to support the President's contention 
and in the following chapter will be discussed conditions which nullify or 
mitigate the President's argument* 

Militarism 

Corruption by an Individual or a small group is the common inference 
when the words 'taisplacad power" and "unwarranted influence" are used in 
connection with government. In every government office, whether it be 
national, state, or local, this potential for corruption exists, No one would 
argue with the statement that every day, somewhere in the United States, on 
some government level, an official is being Investigated and charged with 
corruption. "Teapot Dome Scandals" and individuals like Billle Sol Estes or 
Bobby Baker involve government officials directly, or even more often Indirectly, 
through official lassitude in the wrongful use of power and Influence. On a 
lesser degree there are the Talbotts, Adaases, Macks, and Korths, who leave 
government service not charged with criminal offenses but with tarnished 
reputations because they applied influence gained through government position 


», 


'Self Deceivers," Newsweek, Novessber 11, 1963, p. 114. 


25 


in a doubtful manner. There certainly is nothing new in this. While this 
condition is unsanctioned, undesirable, and impossible to completely eliminate, 
the United States is almost daily showing, as it has many times in the past, 
that the means for controlling this type of misconduct and illegal action are 
available through the proper functioning of an alert, free, and vigilant press 
and the normal legal and investigative powers present at all levels of government. 

Unwarranted influence and misplaced power in the military-industrial com- 
plex, as evidenced by corruption of individuals, is not the subject of Presi- 
dent Eisenhower's warning. Although, if Individual corruption is present and 
particularly if corruption is a part of a general lowering in the moral tone 
of defense officials, either civilian or military, with a combination of indus- 
trial leaders motivated solely for personal po :er or economic profit, the prob- 
lems connected with the military-industrial complex are undoubtedly magnified. 
However, the President's problem is of a much greater magnitude than that of a 
comparatively few individuals so .xv.ig power or money for their own aggrandizement. 
It is a power and influence felt simultaneously at all levels of government- 
federal, state, and local} and 1n all segments of society— economic, political, 
even spiritual; and by Its very weight has the power to endanger not only in- 
dividual liberties but democratic processes. 

An influence so all -encompassing as that described by President Elsenhower 
is traditional militarism, whether he wishes to name the disease or not. A 
freely paraphrased definition of a militaristic state taken from A History of 
Militarism by Alfred Vagts 1s one in which military thinking permeates all 
elements of the society and becomes influential in education, arts, science, and 
industry with undue consideration to military requirements, resulting in a 
corresponding neglect of welfare and culture. The similarity between President 


2 

Alfred Vagts, A History of Militarism, p. 13. 


26 


Eisenhower's warning and Vagts 1 definition is striking. If we accept the 
President's description of the prevalence of the influence of the military- 
industrial complex throughout the country, as many writers and public leaders 
do, instead of just a potential influence, then it would seem that only one 
additional item of proof is necessary to show that the United States has become 
a militaristic state. This missing detail is that military requirements are 
taking a disproportionate share of the country's wealth to the detriment of 
welfare and culture. There is no way to prove that Congress would appropriate 
additional money for education, welfare, and culture if cuts in military 
appropriations were made. However, a case can be made that a decreased military 
budget would result in an increased welfare budget. Congressman Morris K. Udall 
remarked that in 1939, forty-four cents of the budget dollar was spent for labor, 
health, education, and other welfare progrsrs<°-whereas in 1963» only seven cents 
of the budget dollar went for these purposes. Based on the 1939 dollar, federal 
welfare expenditures have shrunk from thirty dollars per citizen to sixteen 
dollars.' 

Several points stressed by ths President in his speech have been over- 
looked by writers and commentators who discuss militarism in the context of 
this speech. 

First, the President said the combination of industry and the military 
is a complex. This problem is usually considered strictly as a military one, 
while occasionally, considered as an industrial problem, but for the President 
it was the combination that presented the potential for misplaced power. 
Secondly, even though the complex has within it the seeds of militarism, it 


Douglass Cater, Power in Washington , p. 249. 


27 


fulfills, as has been previously shown, an imperative need of our country, so 
that the problem is not to destroy the complex but, as Elsenhower has suc- 
cinctly said, to compel its proper meshing so that "liberty and security can 
prosper together." Thirdly, historical militarism is not necessarily or even 
predominantly confined to the military. Civilian militarism of the Hitler, 
Mussolini, and Stalin type can be just as daivirous to a democracy and is more 
applicable to the United States, if Industry is the controlling partner of the 
military-industrial complex, than the military militarism which existed in 
pre-Wortd War II Japan or exists in Franco's Spain today. In fact, no industrial 
state in modern times has become militaristic without the participation and 
cooperation of its industrial leaders, and there is considerable proof that 


civilians are more militaristic than the military. 

The Third Heater of the Complex 

Admiral Hyman Rickover identified Congress with the military-industrial 
complex. Before a Congressional Subcommittee he said there were actually two 
compl exes— the military-industrial and the political-industrial. He implied 
that the political portion was controlled by Congress making its own rules and 
said that <f Congress would control the industrial portion through its investi- 
gative powers that the military would be automatically controlled. ' Admiral 
Rickover would have been more precise if he had said that there was a single 
complex: Congressional-railitary-industrial. There are many examples that 
prove this concept is more accurate, but none more illustrative than the inter- 
relationship of Congress, Industry, and the military in the production of the 
B-70. 




\agts, op_. cit. , pps. 452, 453. 

^Hearings Before a Subcommittee of the Ccrraiittec on Appropriations, House 


of Reprcsentati 


no s Before a Subcommittee of the Cosnmitteo on Appropriations. 
tatives, bath Cong., 2d Sess. (1964), pps. 467, 469, 512-516. 


28 


This prototype piece of military hardware was to be used to develop future 
supersonic planes and the contact was $13 billion." North American Aviation in 
California was the prime contractor for the B-70 or, as it was renamed, the (5S-70. 
Subcontracts included upper fuselage in Georgia, lower fuselage in Ohio, wings 
in Washington, stabilizers in Texas, and navigation system in New York. Alto- 
gether twenty states had important subcontracts. Capitol Hill, led by Congress- 
man Carl Vinson of Georgia, gave this airplane extraordinary support for over 
five years. The Air Force's big bomber men doggedly fought for it.? Nixon 
announced a major increase for the B-70 one week before the election in I960. 
Newspapers said it would mean 3,000 more jobs in California. Where did Nixon 

Q 

make the announcement? In California. Whether North American carefully selected 
the subcontractors in order to influence as many Congressmen as possible 
cannot be proven, but there is a good case that this can be assumed as correct 
because, in the case of the later TFX, according to an executive's assessment, 
Douglas tried to locate a substantial portion of its subcontracts In Missouri 
and Oklahoma, whose Senators, Stuart Symington and the late Robert Kerr, were 
influential in military matters. Twice Congress tried to override Secretary 
McNaraara's veto on the B-70 and once President Kennedy refused to spend money 
appropriated for it. Still, money for the first prototype was provided and 
in October 1964 the plane was flown. Finally, the Air Force didn't want the 
plane. According to Newsweek, "The B-70 now has become a big disadvantage for 
the Air Force. The project must be terminated if we are going to make any 


Forti 


Aircraft: Huailiating Triumph, Newsweek , May 18, 1964, p. 90. 

Zlbld . 

"New York Tfc=s , November 1, I960, p. 1 and November 3» I960, p. 33. 

'Richard Austin Smith, 'The $7-Billion Contract that Changed the Rules," 
uoe, March, 1963, p. 184. 
""Cater, od. cit ., p. 45. 




29 


real progress on new manned bombers."' 1 This is not the only example of 
expensive military hardware, costing millions, becoming obsolete before use. 
The B-70 development program was continued as a compromise between Congress 
representing themselves, as well as industry and the military represented by 
the Air Force, and the executive brunch represented by Secretary McNamara and 
the Oefense Department. 

In a July \9&h report. House Republican leaders charged Secretary McNamara 
with planned weapons obsolescence. Admittedly much of the material was for 
1964 campaign purposes, but every single recommendation made would increase the 
defense budget. Their principal recommendation was for new manned airplanes to 
operate in the earth's environment or near space and for full exploration of 
the military implications of outer space. Secretary HcNamara's position was that 
Minuteman and Polaris had made manned strategic bombers of lesser importance. 
The Air Force was undoubtedly for manned bombers in addition to missiles as they 
would increase its influence. Also the Republican Congressional Conmittee 
recommended an anti -ballistic-missile system, which would support the Army who 
had wanted to go into production with Nike Zeis, its anti-missile missile, for 
some time. But Secretary McNamtra was insisting upon more tests. Another re- 
commendation was an attack aircraft carrier with nuclear instead of conventional 
power. Considerable money had already been spent on this project with little 
evidence of success. The concluding Republican recommendation was a comprehensive 
antisubmarine warfare program to result in end products. The Navy certainly 
agreed with this. So the Republican leaders had actually recommended large 
increases in areas advocated by each service end a large segment of industry. 
These projects were among the most expensive £nd were among those which had 
either been eliminated by the executive branch or had shown little progress in 


Loc. cit. , Newsweek. 


30 


spite of large expenditures. 12 These recommendations had been made at a 
politically sensitive period (July 1964) and ware clear evidence of the political 
importance as well as the close connection of Congress with defense industry and 
weapons systems proposed by the military. 

Economic and Political Importance of Congressional-Military-Industrial Complex 

Fifty billion dollars is being spent for defense this year (FY 1965), or J 
one-half of our national budget, or approximately 8% of an over $600 billion 
GNP compared to 1% or an $83 billion GNP in 1936. The military budget has 
increased $48.5 billion since 1936.' 3 The growth and size of the defense budget 
staggers the imagination. If there were no other considerations, the size of 
the defense budget alone makes it an overriding political issue. As an example 
of the effect of defense industry on an entire area in the midwest east of the 
Mississippi— the auto industry was booming in Detroit and the steel industry was 
up in Gary, yet this area lagged behind the average growth record of the United 
States as a whole for the years 19^2-1962, as far as gains in population, non- 
farm jobs and personal incomes were concerned. The reason given was that prime 
defense contracts were down 26.5% in this area for the same period. 1 '* No 
Congressman can afford to ignore such facts as these. Congressmen are reelected' 
on the basis of what they do for their districts. Defense Installations exist 
in nearly two of every three congressional districts, averaging two and one- 
half per each district. '5 And every district wants more. No one doubts the 


12 Heather M. David, "Republican Body Charges 00D With Planned Weapons 
Obsolescence," Missiles and Rockats, July 6, 1964, p. 18. 

'3u. S. Department of Ccnrosrce, Historical Studies of the United States? 
Colonial Times to 1957, p. 793. 

• '"'what's Happening to the Middle West?", U. S. News and World Report, 
October 14, 1963, pps. 55-58. 

'Scater, op_. clt., p. 30. 


31 


importance to a Con;;reirman of a reputation that he is able to get industry 
for his district* This is accepted by Americans as part of a Congressman's 
job, but the extent to which elected officials pursue this quest certainly 
provides ample opportunity for unwarranted influence and misplaced pe./er. A 
few additional examples, that could be duplicated many times, should prove 
this point. 

In the case of the MMRBM (mobile medium-range ballistic missile) the 
Defense Department asked for $1^3 million. The House Appropriations Committee 
cut the funds to $43 million. Secretary McNamara never appeared enthusiastic 
for the weapon, so he decided not to fight for the remaining sum. But the con- 
tractors got busy, Tha work would he done in Arisona by the Hughas Aircraft 
and a subsidiary •# Goodyear. Additional work would be done in Utah by 
Thiokol. General Precision would bring jobs to New York and New Jersey. Ford's 
Aeronautical Oivision, as well as Hughes Aircraft, would bring work to California. 
The contractors presented the case to Interested Senators and Representatives, 
beginning with the statement of the importance of this weapon in defense of 
the free world and ending by reminding at least one Senator that their company 
had contributed to tha Senator's last campaign.' 6 . 

The Army, as stated, pressed for early production of the Nike-Zeus anti- 
missile missile. Army magazine featured an entire issue praising Nike-Zeus and 
containing advertisements from Western Electric, the prime contractor, and 
eight aeronautical subcontractors. Contained in the issue was a map showing 
thirty-seven states which would get more defense dollars when production 
started on o project estimated to cost $20 billion before it was ccr.pl ctcd. 


'"Julius Cuscha, "Arirso and the 8ig Money Ken," Harper's Hagazi na, March, 
17 Ibid, p. <*5. 


32 


Senator Ted Kennedy campaigned on the slogan, "He can do more for Massa- 
chusetts." There was no doubt in anyone's mind that the slogan meant Kennedy 
could do more in Washington by getting more business for Massachusetts, 
and under our present budget, this means defense business. Even before Kennedy 
took office, he went to Grumman Aircraft on Long Island to partially fulfill his 
campaign promises. Ordinarily such actions by a freshman Senator would be 
deeply resented in the Senate, but censureship was limited; no doubt being the 
President's brother assisted young Kennedy. At least he was successful, as he 

announced that Grumann had awarded a $50 million subcontract to the RCA (Radio 

18 
Corporation of America) in Massachusetts. 

Convair Oivision of General D""amics, employing about 18,000, was the 
largest single employer in Fort Worth. The ccupany was in serious financial 
difficulties and was facing personnel reductions if B-58 procurement tapered 
off as planned by the Defense Department. Congressman James Wright tried to 
influence the Executive branch, members of Congress, and in fact, all Washing- 
ton officialdom as to the importance of the B-58 to national security. It is 
reported he allowed General Dynamics to use his office as its headquarters and 
he even privately visited General Curtis LeMay to convince him of the strategic 
necessity of the B-58. He was successful in Congress but President Kennedy re- 
fused to spend the money. ° 

Senator Jacob Javits of New York complained that statistics revealed that 
New York was receiving only 9.9 per cent of military procurement compared to 

20 
23.9 per cent in California. Representative Ken Hechler rose in the House 


ffibid. 

^Cater, op. cit. , p. 39. 
Ibid., p. 3ST~ 


33 


and annou.iceds 

I em firmly against the kind of logrolling which would subject our 
defense program to narrowly sectional or selfish pulling and hauling. 
I am getting pretty hot under the collar about the way my state of 
. Virginia is shortchanged in Army, Navy, and Air Force installations 
. » . I cm going to stand up on ray hind legs and roar until West Virginia 
gats the fair treatment she deserves, 



The allocation of military installations and bases still retains its eco- 
tc appeal to Congressmen* President Johnson last January announced the 
closing of 33 bases and 1; sed the .-.in-,ber to over 60. Within a 

C.nd on three naval bases because of additional 
information re 'dm Congressional leaders. 22 Every Congressman was in 

of ::'.osing the baies—except for that installation or base in his own 
dist; - ,.ier and Barry Goldwater indicated, while campaigning 

that this -c.-j. ...outh, New Hampshire, Naval Base should not 
is wasn't one of the bases President Johnson had decided to keep 

snt t d apply to two-thirds of the Congressional 

ountry, Kartir ,. Her, the county district attorney in Denver, 

..-tin plant, said: 

: e last Congressional campaign for our dis- 
i or. the question of whether or not the United States Govern- 
,.i more rr.oney for military appropriations on de/ense, or 

s wall known that President Kennedy campaigned in I960 in West Vir» 
Mid Pennsylvania strictly on the issue that he would relieve unemployment 
by transferring defense contracts. Later in 1962 he told a Pennsylvania 


21 

by Defense Procurement Subcommittee of the Joinc Economic Subcom- 
mittee of t t iiconoraic SubcoOTittee, I960, Congressional Quarterly, XIX, 
March Ik, , ':67. 

•_.", Associcted Press Dispatch, April 2k, 1964, p. 1. 

.-uary 26, 1964, p. 14», and February 27, 1964, p. 1. 
^Jce. .e.- In The ?entagon, p. 219. 


34 


audience that "working with Governor David Lawrence since I960, we have increased 
by 50 per cent the number of prime defense contracts that come to Pennsylvania." 2 ^ 

This political interest in defense industry is expected by Americans. The 
Portland Oregonian editorially criticized Senator Wayne Morse as follows: 
"Washington State's working Senators won a billion dollars in military spending 

in one year for their people. . .Oregon's talking Senator has won only 64 percent 

26 
of what Washington received." Republican nominee Jean Bradshaw of Missouri 

tried to unseat the incumbent Senator Stuart Symington in 1964 and several 

times charged that Senator Symington has done nothing to get defense industry 

27 
into Missouri. The charge was mado despite the fact that Senator Symington 

is recognized as one of the most influential Senators in Congress in defense 

matters. Similar charges are repeated by political opponents throughout the 

nation. 

Similarly Congressmen still retain their interest in the traditional 

"pork barrel" legislation of military construction and civil works but these 

combined programs are less than $2 billion," compared to the military procurement 

contracts running annually between $20 and $25 billion. Interest of Congressmen 

in government money to be spent in their district is not of itself evidence of 

unwarranted influence, it is a part of their job and does have this potential. 

Defense Department carefully notifies Senators and Congressmen of approved 

contracts so that they can get the credit at home even though they had nothing 

to do with the contract. This has been going on at least since the days of WPA 


^Duscha, op_. cit ., p. 42. 
t°Cator, op. cit., pps. 38-39. 
^Kansas City Star , August 11, 1964, pps. 4-5. 

2 8 Budget of The United States Government, Fiscal Year Ending June 30« 1965, 
p. 357. 


35 


(Works Progress Administration) ° when Roosevelt tried to eradicate the depression 
through public works and other projects. Some people believe that the publicity 
a Congressman receives from such actions objectionable, particularly as the 

Congressman should be interested in legislation not defense contracts, while 

30 
others agree that it is just good politics. If the Administration played 

favorites in notification, then certainly objections by Congress would be heard. 

Even if it is accepted that most Congressmen and Senators are a group of 
men dedicated to the best interests of the United States, it must be admitted 
that, even with dedicated men, personal interests and the also dedicated interest 
to their states or districts may often achieve an unwarranted or illogical 
priority. None of the Illustrations given have definitively proven misplaced 
power or unwarranted Influence, but they do show that the opportunity is present, 
and the tendency to do whatever is necessary to accomplish a desired result is 
also evident. The influence of individual Senators and Representatives varies 
greatly, and it is doubtful if the actions of a single Senator or Congressman, 
unsupported by his colleagues, could achieve a result sufficiently detrimental 
to the best interests of the United States to require notice by a retiring 
President. But a group of perhaps misguided but dedicated and convinced 
Congressmen, working in concert with Industrialists and the military, certainly 
has the power and influence for this abuse. 

Particularly is this power important when the size of the military budget 
has such an overriding effect on what is recognized by officials as the major 
political issue— the economic welfare of their constituents. Year in and 


°The author, as a clerk in UPA from 1935-35, had the duty of notifying Sena- 
tors and Congressmen of all projects approved in their states or districts at 
least one day in advance of the Administration's announcement. The status of some 
projects was followed closely by some Congressmen, while at other times the Con- 
gressmen called to have the project explained to them. This was done purely to 
give the elected legislators publicity, but Republicans and Democrats were treated 
exactly the same as far as notification was concerned. 
' Duscha, o£. cit ., p. 41. 


■ 


36 


year out, economic prosperity is probably the underlying decisive issue in 
electing or defeating more Representatives, Senators, and Governors than any 
other single issue. Prosperity brings reelection and conversely economic 
depressions are certainly conducive to political change of the party in power. 

Changed Relationship Between Congress and the Military 

Congressmen have always been, as they must be, vitally interested in any 
federal money spent in their districts or states, and military appropriations 
do not differ from any other type of federal grants. "Pork barrel" legislation 
refers to appropriations for the development of harbors, flood control, and 
the general development of water resources to be supervised by the Army Corps 
of Engineers. Between Congressmen and the Army Engineers a close and understanding 
association developed. Outside of this special relationship, prior to World War 
II, Congress and the military had been to a large degree, antagonists. Tradi- 
tionally the military have been concerned with an improved military establishment, 
while Congress was interested solely with the effect of the military establish- 
ment on the well-being of their constituents. Consequently we find the 125 
pre-World War II Army posts scattered throughout the country. All attempts 
to consolidate them in order to train a more efficient Army met immediate and 
successful resistance by Congressmen, each of whom would not willingly submit 
to the financial loss of an Army post to his district. Similarly Senator 
Alben Barkley protested the elimination of the number of horses allocated to 
officers and the reduction of the Cavalry because these actions meant a decrease 
in the number of Army horses, many of which were raised in Kentucky. Likewise 
farmers raising hay had the support of their Congressmen in resisting the 
mechanization of the Arrny.3' These are typical examples of Congressional 


31 Edward Pendelton Herring, The Impact of War. See Chapter V for a complete 
analysis of the inter-relationship of Congress and the military before World War II. 


37 


>^ 


influence considered as normal in our political traditions before World War II. 

Since World War II this has changed. Now no Congressman can afford to 
fight against a more efficient military establishment. Further, as is now 
recognized, it is an imperative need of our country to have the finest military 
establishment in the world. A Congressman now needs support of the military 
for whatever action he proposes. The $20 billion annually in military contracts 
represents economic survival for many communities, as much defense industry has 
no civilian counterpart and, in other communities, it takes time to switch to 
civilian production even if it is feasible. No Congressman is doing any more 
than his predecessors did when he attempts to get and keep as much military 
business in his community as he possibly can. The important fact now is that 
Congressmen go to the Defense Department for assistance to get projects 
while formerly Congress closely controlled all increases in defense expendi- 
tures. The military and Congress are no longer antagonists. If a Congressman 
is to succeed in getting military industry, he must have the military on his 
side. Consequently, the result is that Congressmen now seek military support 
whenever possible, just to get or keep military industry in their district. 
The history of the TFX contract, already related, is a prime example of 
this willing and special pleading.' 

The Military Side 

Military leaders have studied their military history well. They know the 
United States has never been prepared for any war it has fought. Now with 
supersonic atomic missiles threatening instant destruction, they have the 
responsibility for the security of the nation. This Is their job. Unpreparedness 




3 2 Duscha, o£. cit., This article gives additional examples of Congressmen 
and Senators In dealing with Defense Department officials on defense contracts. 


38 


in this missile age may not only mean defeat, but invites attack. The Air Force 
recognizes the danger to the country that can come through the air. The Navy 
recognizes the danger that potential warfare at sea offers. The Army recog- 
nizes the danger to our country of the constant nibbling expansion of Communists 
on the periphery of areas once considered part of the free world. Under these 
conditions, the Army recommends UHT (Universal Military Training), more and 
better atomic missiles for the ground soldier, more and better tanks, more and 
better trained soldiers, more and better helicopters; the Navy reconmends more 
and better atomic submarines, mere and better nuclear-powered ships, more and 
better means to fight enemy submarines; the Air Force recommends more and 
better planes of all types, more and better strategic missiles. Scientific 
advances are constantly producing recorcmendati ons from both industry and the 
military for improvement and changes on equipmant and hardware. To guarantee 
security, only the latest and best equipment is acceptable. In fact, the 
American public feels that the /ir.e:-ican soldier, sailor, and airman deserve 
the very finest equipment. A Ccng/essional investigation almost followed 
the report from Vietnam that American airmen were being killed because they 
were being forced to use second rate equipment." No longer will Americans be 
satisfied with the use of a thirty-year-old rifle, as they were in World War II 
with the use of the famous Springfield rifle. As Charles J. Hitch, Comptroller 
of the Defense Department, says: 

There can be no question regarding the crucial importance of promoting 
military technology in the nuclear era. Any power that lags significantly 
in military technology, no matter how large its military budget or how 
efficiently it allocates resources, is likely to be at the mercy of a more 
progressive enemy. Both weapons and systems for delivering them have gone 
through several revolutions in the few years since the end of the Second 
World War. Individual bombs are now 1,0C0 times as powerful as those 
dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, which were themselves 1,000 times as 
powerful as the largest dropped on Germany. Breakthroughs in missile 


33 


New York Times, Hay 13, 1964, p. 2 and May 14, 1964, p. 1. 


39 


technology are continually threatening the whole offensive or defensive 
apparatus of one side or the other. Keeping ahead in the technological 
race is not in itself a guarantee of security in these circumstances j 
it remains essential to incorporate the technology in operational hardware 
I forces in being") and to deploy them and use them with skill and intelli- 
gence. Sut no amount of production, skill and intelligent use can compen- 
sate for significant technological inferiority.} 4 * 

With this scientific revolution in military equipment and the general rise 
in prices since World War II, defense equipment costs have skyrocketed. For 
instance, a World War II Sherman tank cost $50,000; a tank to do its equivalent 
job today costs $236,000. The jeep and 2^-ton truck of World War II cost 
$1,400 and $2,300 respectively; today the costs are $2,850 and $8,513. 35 
Airplanes present even greater variations. Fighters late in World War II cost 
$50,985; their replacements today cost $5,200,000. The late World War II 
bomber cost $509,465 compared to the $8,000,000 cost of a modern bomber.? 6 An 
Army Air Assault Division has eliminated many vehicles and replaced them with 
aircraft many of which cost $3,000,000 apiece. 37 Radios, individual equipment, 
crew weapons, and all other equipment show the same type of increase. Prices 
in the civilian economy have also risen, and in some areas even doubled. The 
dollar lost 43% of its purchasing power between 1945 and I965 which accounts for 
about one-half of the increased costs. The great strides in technological 
development offer no price comparisons that are valid with the civilian economy 
but it does not appear that prices have risen proportionately. But the 
American soldier, sailor, and airman must have the latest and best of every- 
thing. This thesis is praiseworthy and the only acceptable one but there does 
seem to be evidence that defense equipment and hardware costs have risen out 


34 

Charles J. Hitch and Roland N. HcKean, T!:e Economics of Defense in the 

Nuclear Age, pps. 243-244. ' — 

^Department of the Army, U. S. Army and National Security, p. 71. 

fMistory of U. S. Air Force , 1907-1957 , pps. 92, 117 and Aviation Week . 

August 2b, 1963, p. 32 and November 25, 1961 p. 28. — 

> ^ Newsweek, April 27, 1964, p. 36. 


40 


of proportion with the general rise in prices. Certainly equipment with the 
latest scientific advances and huge contracts present opportunities as well as 
difficulties to defense contractors. 

<J Military men are fully cognizant of the threat to this nation, recognize 
their responsibility as an awesome task, and it is not too much to say that 
many of them are honestly afraid for the consequences to our country posed by 
the enemy threat. Being dedicated to the security of the nation and knowing 
the possibility of enemy air, sea and ground power. Army, Navy and Air Force 
leaders would consider they had failed in their mission if they hadn't done 
everything possible to maintain their service at its highest potential. And 
this means using every worthwhile improvement or advancement science and in- 
dustry can produce. Further, the military firmly believes that any enemy who 
recognizes that the superiority of the United States is unquestioned will never 
attack. Every budget presented by the military since World Uar II has had the 
military recommendations pared down by civilicn chiefs. The military will 
never feel they have sufficient ar:,is and equipment to give the people of the 
United States the assurance of security they would like to offer. Under these 
conditions, any recommendations for curtailment in defense funds must come from 
the civilian Secretaries in the military departments, Bureau of the Budget, 
or the President and be implemented by Congress. If left to the military, the 
[ military-industrial complex will grow in size and importance. If the amount of 
money spent on defense contracts presents a potential for misplaced power and 
unwarranted influence, unchecked military influence will increase this potential. 


Industry and the Military 

The effect of industry on defense spending is to increase it. Individual 
industrialists often advocate a decrease in government spending and even 


41 


decreases in the defense budget, but this advocacy consists of a general 
reconmendation which does not affect their own specific product or industry. 
In this latter case, it is strictly in the American tradition for business- 
men to use every method possible including Congressional pressure, to sell 
their product. One of the widely accepted beliefs, which undoubtedly has 
much truth in it, is that industry has made America a great country and that 
anything that legally promotes profits is acceptable. 

It is, in fact, a prime duty of government to protect and promote industry. J 
On the other hand, Americans have also recognized that control of business is 
necessary to prevent preferential treatment and unfair competition, to protect 
the individual citizen, and to prevent panics and recessions. Beginning with 
the Interstate Commerce Act of 1387 and the Sherman Anti-Trust Act of 1890, 
there has been continuing legislation to regulate business, to create new 
commissions, and even to allow the government to enter business where industry 
has failed to provide what the government thinks is necessary, as in the case 
of the TVA (Tennessee Valley Authority) and the REA (Rural Electrification 
Administration). Most of this original legislation came during the administra- 
tion of Franklin 0. Roosevelt. 

During World War II economic controls were extensive and, while they 
were relaxed after World War II, no Congress now adjourns without new or amending 
legislation which affects industry; particularly is this true with the relation- 
ship of workers or unions with industry, as in the case of the Taft-Hartley Act. 
The twin propositions, which may at first appear antithetical, that industry 
must be controlled as well as promoted by government, is no longer questioned. 

Unlike Congress, business always had a close relationship with the military 
although, except in time of war, the amount has been so small as not to affect 


to 


the industrial community as a whole. Beginning in 1844 with the "Treaty of 
Wanghia" the United States was guaranteed equal opportunity for American 
businessmen in China. The Navy, Army, and Marines were each present at 
different times to protect American interests. Japan was opened up for trade 
by Perry in 1854, although the Spanish-American War may not have been mainly 
expansionist, business interests in the Philippines and Hawaii were furthered 
by close collaboration with the military. Until recently Latin America has 
been considered a special province of American businessmen. "Dollar 
Diplomacy" was the name given to this policy. "This name had stuck to the 
efforts of the Taft Administration to force other nations to accept American 
investments and then to employ havy and Marines to protect American capital. 3 

Wars have always resulted In big profits. George Washington complained of 
the lack of patriotism and the price-gouging of those who supplied our first 
Army. Almost the same conditions listed in 5312 and 1848. Throughout the 
settlement of the west, the Army had difficulty supplying posts at what they 
considered a fair price. Large fortunes were made in expanding wool and cotton 
industries, shoes, food processing, and iron industries during the Civil War, 
legally for the most part, but with the knowledge and assistance of the govern- 
ment. Suppliers again became rich during the Spanish-American War. 

After World War I a Congressional Report, in five small volumes, of the 
Senate Munitions Investigating Com-irittee, chaired by Senator Gerald P. Nye 
of North Dakota, stressed the heavy profits made by American financiers and 
armament makers during World War I and attempted to prove, (though most present 
commentators consider its proof to be inconclusive) that the United States entry 
into World War I was due to the covert pressure exerted by the munitions makers. 


William A. Miller, A New History of the United States, p. 339. 


43 


The Nye Committee Report was unanimous in it presentation of facts, but its 
recommended solutions presented a variety of opinions. Among the accepted 
allegations were that American companies adopted methods of bribery of foreign 
government officials to secure business after World War I. One agent (Cole 
Arms Company) "brought into play the most despicable side of human nature, 
lies, deceit, hypocrisy, greed, and graft occupying a most prominent part 
in the transactions." The report further said that the munitions companies 
were more interested in selling armaments than in furthering peace, and that 

they never aided any proposal for limitation of armaments but rather actively 

39 
opposed it. 

In 1929 William D. Shearer told the press that he had been hired by cer- 
tain shipbuilders to break up the Disarmament Conference. He insisted that he 
had done his work well, but that he had not been properly compensated for his 
pains and hence he was willing to betray his former employers. The Committee 
pointed out that munitions people were opposed to the arms embargo as were the 
Army and Navy Department, inferring that they were in league. Seles abroad 
were assisted by the War, Navy, Coramerce,and even State Departments. War 
scares were even created, toppling some Latin American countries. 

Today with Military Assistance Advisory Groups (MAAG's) in 40 countries 
and with the United States bound by treaties with countries surrounding 

the iron curtain, no one censures American military men for actively selling 

41 
American military equipment. 


"l). s. Cong., Senate Report 944 , Report of the Special Committee on Inves- 
tigation of the Munitions Committee, 74th Cong., 2nd Session (1936), Parts 3 and 
TT, passim. 

4u He rring, op_. cit ., p. 188. 

41|<ansas City Star, Associated Press Dispatch, May 9, 1964, p. 1. 


44 


No member of NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) would purchase Ameri- 
can equipment unless it was recommended and used by the United States Army, Navy, 
or Air Force. Some of the smaller underdeveloped countries are willing and 
forced to take obsolete equipment but, even in these cases they prefer the latest 
and best for prestige reasons, if nothing else. Most large companies have repre- 
sentatives in Europe, usually retired military men acting as their salesmen. 
General Joe W. Kelly, who recently retired from the Air Force, will be Senior 
European Representative for General Dynamics Corporation in Paris. He will work 
for Roger Lewis, General Dynamics President, a former Air Force Assistant Sec- 
retary. This type of announcement is a frequent occurrence. American arms 
industry is truly a world-wide concern. 

It is claimed that World Wsr I created 23,000 new millionaires, with one 
estimate as high as 29,000. ^ it aopears that if this is so, and considering 
the relative costs of World War I and World War II, there must have been at 
least as many as 290,000 new millionaires after World War II. 

William 0. Miller sums up World War II experience as follows: 

Taxes covered an unprecedented forty percent of American wartime 
expenditures. Federal corporation and graduated personal income taxes 
reached record highs, which brought a good deal of grumbling but few 
criminal attempts at evasion. Yet corporation profits after taxes, 
swollen by the standard "cost plus 1 contracts, rose from $5,000,000,000 J 
to nearly $10,000,000,000 five years later. 

There is no doubt that wars bring profits to industrialists. And the 

cold war appears to be no exception. The M. A. Hanna company made 57 percent 

profit on selling nickel to the government for defense stockpiling from 1955 to 

I960, while the mining industry as a whole was making only 8.4 percent. This 

cost the government $20 million, while at the same time 12 copper companies that 


J 2 The Journal of The Armed Forces, August 15, 1964, p. 6. 
t^Edwin S. Corwin, Total Use and The Constitution, p. 85. 
^Miller, op. cit., pps. 396-397. 


kS 


had agreed to furnish copper for stockpiling were excused from their contracts 
and able to make a quick $3 million profit because of a temporary increase in 
the price of copper. The government is interested in industry making profits. 
One example that can be duplicated many times is that of Western Electric, the 
prime contractor for Army's Nike performing only about 25% of the work, yet 
earning a profit of $112,500,000. Industry, of course, would say that this 
is an invalid comparison and that profits must be compared with investment and 
not work. Cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts which are necessary in war time continue 
in the cold war period. In these contracts the government is taking all the 
risk. In 1952 13% of defense contracts were of this type but by 1961 they had 
increased to 38%. McNamara says he hopes to cut this type of contract to less 
than 20% with a goal of 12% within a year. Savings through competitive bidding 
have proven to be substantial, but still over 85% of the defense contracts are 
negotiated. 1 *^ The Defense Department appears to be a good customer well worth 
keeping. And of course, its patronage is vital to the businesses which have 
no civilian counterparts and of which the military is the sole customer. 

It is an unarguable truth that a disregard for profits means business 
failures and, without profits, there would be no private American industry. But 
there is also evidence that the dollar is without conscience and its accumulation 
can become an overriding motive of industrialists to the detrement of the 
general welfare. The fact that the stock market went down when Khruschev and 
Eisenhower proclaimed the "Geneva Spirit" and skyrocketed when the Summit 
Conference failed after the U-2 incident seems to indicate that those people 
interested in the stock market are able to evaluate the effects of the cold war. 4 


^Julius Duscha, "The Costly Mysteries ov Defense Spending," Harper's Maga- 
zine , April, 1964, pps. 59-65 pnssira. 

** 6 Fred J. Cook, The Warfare; State, p. 168. 


46 


And above all, It appears reasonable to state (as was stated) of the military, 
that any reduction in the military-industrial complex will never be accomplished 
by the willing cooperation of defense industry but will be resisted by every 
means and pressures that industry can employ. 

Combination in Place of Separation 

C. Wright Mills whose theory of a ruling "power elite" is probably the 

most quoted theory among those who believe that traditional American liberties 

are endangered, points out that at one time our economy was a scattering of 

small productive units but is now dominated by two or three hundred giant 

corporations; that our political order was once decentralized among the states, 

but is now controlled by an executive establishment reaching into every cranny 

of social structure; and that the military order was once a small, distrusted 

establishment, but is now the largest bureaucratic domain in the government. 

American capitalism is now to a considerable degree, military capvc^lism. All 

decisions of national consequence are made by a small coterie of political, 

economic, and military men. Congressmen whose prestige must be based on their 

location are now in the second tier of power and have been superseded by 

approximately fifty men in the executive branch who have never been elected to 

office, but are strictly appointive. This "power elite" 

exists all over the country, and it is a coalition of generals in 
the roles of corporation executives, of politicians masquerading as 
admirals, of corporation executives acting like politicians, of civil 
servants who become majors, of vice-admirals who are also assistants 
to a cabinet of f i cer, , who is himself, by the way, really a member of 
the managerial elite. 4 ' 

Hills' arguments, undoubtedly appear plaisible to some but are unproved. 


^C. Wright Mills, The Powe r Elite , p. 273. This entire paragraph is a 
consideration of several points made by Mills and in some cases follows closely 
his actual wordage. Passim and pps. 8, 10, 18, 224, 231, 252, 275, 276. 


Kl 


To prove his thesis, he would have to analyze important decisions, show who was 
responsible for them, and demonstrate that these decisions were adverse to the 
concept of democratic government or individual liberty and freedom. This he has 
not done, and it would be impossible to do until government files ara declassi- 
fied; even then positive proof will be, at best debatable, and more probably 
sti 1 1 unproven. 

Admittedly the largest single impact on the United States economy today 
comes from defense and allied industries such as those connected with the 
space program. It is also true that the executive establishment is increasingly 
concentrated on the national level with a corresponding decrease in power of 
state governments. Whether this fact has increased or decreased individual 
liberties is arguable. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 and proposed one for 1965 
are good examples. They are taking considerable authority away fros some 
states, but are increasing greatly the freedom of American Negroes. Other 
examples of concentration of power at the national level have accomplished vital 
jobs because they were left undone by the states, such as TVA, social security 
and aid to education, or because their regulations must be national in scope 
in order to work, such as the regulation of business performed by the Federal 
Trade Commission, Interstate Carjr.orce Commission, etc. 

It is also true that there has been a shift in the background of the 
Presidential appointee. Beginning with Roosevelt's "Brain Trust" there has 
been a growing tendency for the cabinet heads and personal advisors to the 
President to be non-political, at least concerning ambition for an elective 
office. There are many exceptions to this statement, but it is certainly true 

that Truman had a predilection for the military, as Eisenhower did for the 

1*8 
businessman, and Kennedy did for the scholar. It is too soon to judge the 


Richard Neustadt, "The President at Mid-Century," Law and Contemporary 
Problems, Autumn 1956, p. 634. 


48 


U a| 


Johnson appointees, as the few appointments he has made have been men who have 
been close to him for years, but thuy have not gained their reputations through 
elective office. \This brings up the most important point made by Mil1s--that 
decisions of national importance are made by a small group of men in the 
industrial, executive, and military hierarchy whose positions are interchangeable. 

To assure that power at the national level does not become concentrated, 
the Constitution is based on the "separation of powers" and "checks and balances." 
If the power of the legislative branch, as Mills and others claim, has been 
superseded by the executive branch and the power of decision of the executive 
branch is in turn in the hands of a small, non-elective, inextricably mixed 
group of men whose positions are at times in the military establishment, at 
times in the industrial complex, and at times in the executive branch, not only 
has there been an erosion of the principle of the "separation of powers" as 
envisioned by the framers, but the coordinate powers of legislative and executive 
are no longer applicable and also there is certainly a greater potential for 
misplaced power and unwarranted influence than if these three segrsants of our 
society were separate and distinct and operated with a check on each other. 
As previously stated, Mills has not proved this conclusion because he has not 
shown what decisions were made by whom. Still there is evidence of interpene- 
tration of the military, industrial, and executive segments of our society to 
a greater degree than before. 

From early in American history. Army and Navy officers have conducted 
negotiations and concluded treaties with foreign countries, attended international 
conferences and carried out foreign military occupations; at home, starting with 
the Civil War, officers became responsible for, and experienced in, the new de- 
mands of military logistics in the era of the industrial revolution; and in the 


<*9 


westward expansion, Array engineers in particular associated with govern- 
ment and private business in the building of the nation; finally, military 

officers in Washington were no strangers to politics either, as it effected 

ba 

them personally or as it influenced their responsibilities. In the Roose- 
velt Administration many Army and Havy officers were brought into WPA to organ- 
ize and supervise its growth. But these numbers seem minuscule compared to 
those of military men now used in the executive establishment. 

In 1953 nine Army Generais and 58 Colonels were assigned to civilian 
agencies of government; in 1957 about 200 Generals or Admirals were ser- 
ving in international or i n tet-servi ce agencies, with more than 1300 
Colonels or naval officers of comparable rank and about 6000 officers of 
lower grade as support.' 

The CIA (Central Intelligence Agency) was originally directed and largely 
staffed by military men. 51 George Marshall became Secretary of State; Major 
General John H. Hildring became Assistant Secretary of State; General Bedell 
Smith became head of CIA and then Assistant Secretary of State; General Max- 
well Taylor has been made Ambassador to South Vietnam, probably the most sen- 
sitive political assignment in the foreign service; and there are General Herbert 

B. Powell, Ambassador to Australia; Admiral Jerald Wright, Ambassador to the 

52 
Republic of China; Admiral George Anderson, Ambassador to Portugal f General 

James Gavin recently resigned as Ambassador to France. Military men have pene- 
trated the executive establishment and are being used in responsible jobs. 
The I960 House investigation on conflict of interest reveals some in- 
teresting facts. This report lists 33,326 regular officers on the retired list. 


^Raymond, o£. cit ., p. 8. 
-50j o hn M. Swomley, Jr., The Military Establishment , p. 9. 
51 Raymond, op_. cit. , p. BTI 
5 2 Army-Havy-Ai r Force Register , June 27, 196*», p. *». 


50 


This list does not include retired career reservists, other reservists, or 
National Guard officers. Of this number 1,426 are employed by 72 of the lead- 
ing corporations queried by the committee. The number employed in corporations 
not queried in unknown. At this time 100 corporations were receiving 75% of 
all defense contracts and 86% of these defense contracts are decided by the 
Defense Department without competitive bidding. In order of priority, the top 
five companies receiving defense contracts have hired the following retired 
officers: General Dynamics, 186 retired officers, including 27 Generals or 
Admirals, and Frank Pace, a fonr.:r Secretary of the Army, Chairman of the 
Board! Lockheed, 171 officers, including 27 Generals or Admirals; Boeing, 61 
officers, including 5 Generals or Aomirals; General Electric, 26 officers, 
including 7 Generals or Admirals* North American Aviation, 92 officers, in- 
eluding 8 Generals or Admirals." \ 

A few of the Generals or Admirals who accapted positions in industry in 
other than the top five companies include General Lucius Clay, who was Military 
Governor in Germany, who became head of Continental Can Corporation and later 
a senior partner in Lehman Brothers; General Douglas MacArthur, who became 
Chairman of the Board at Remington Rand; Admiral Ben Moreel went to Jones and 
Laughlin Steel Corporation; General Brehon Sorcervall became head of Koppers 
Company; General Omar Bradley headed Bulova Watch Company. 7 Taking at random 
one issue of the Journal of the Armed Forces (September 5, 1964), one finds 
announcements of 11 officers accepting jobs in industry. This happens 
practically each week on a comparable scale. 


53u. S» Cong., House, Subccmmittee for Special Investigations of the Com- 
mittee on Armed Service, Hearings on Employment of Retired Military and Civi- 
lian Personnel By Defense Industries, 86th Cor.g., 1st Sess (1959) passim, here- 
after called Hebert Comnittee. 

^Raymond, op_. cit. , p. 83. 

55journa1 of The Armed Forces, September 5, 1964, p. 28. 


51 


There is no doubt that industry finds retired officers valuable employees. 
The easing of military professionals into the top echelons of industry seems 
to underscore both the caliber of the individual officer and the similarities 
between military and Industrial management. For officers to continue after 
retirement an association with industry begun while in uniform is profit- 
able to both and only natural. Industry is continually looking for men who 
understand military procurement and officers retiring, on the average 
between 40 and 55, are looking for a second career. The possibility for unwar- 
ranted influence in this condition has been expressed by Admiral Hyr.ian Rickover 
in a remark that retired officers frequently laave their jobs to man "who are 
dear friends, or . . . whom they tv.ve been influential in appointing and natur- 
ally they will be listened to."' 6 

If this is true of military officers, it is also true of industrial 
leaders; they do not change their friends when they enter the executive branch. 
Mills probably goes too far when ha says it would be ridiculous to seriously 
believe that Charles Erwin Wilson of General Electric (as an example of all 
businessmen in government) represented anyone or any interest other than that 
of the corporate world. And this is not because he is dishonest, but probably 
because he is a man of solid integrity— "as sound as a dollar."57 Businessmen 
in government sincerely believe that what is good for business is good for the 
country, as the military believe that the United States cannot have too much 
defense. Even if both the military and industry sincerely attempt to be entirely 
dispassionate, they would find it difficult to divorce themselves from a life- 
time of professional experience. Increasing the danger is the greater size of 


the defense budget, the greater number of industrialists in government, and the 


5°Congressiona1 Quarterly, op . cit ., p. 464. 
57Hills, 0£. cit ., p. 285. 


52 


greater number of military men in industry as well as in the executive branch, 
which conditions present additional opportunities for unwarranted influence 
or misplaced power by their very multiplicity. 

Lobbying 

Lobbying for the military and for defense industry comes from all 
angles and is probably as ruthless as any at the Capitol. Presentations by 
teams of experts and expensive brochures are given to Congressmen in their 
offices where the briefers are not adverse to describing the importance of 
their weapon to the defense of the free world, the economic benefits that 
production would bring to the Senators or Representative's constituency, 
and, at least in one case, reminding the Senator of contributions to his last 
campaign. 58 The NAM (National Association of Manufacturers) has a lobbying 
office in Washington which presents the viewpoint of industry to the legis- 
lators. It spends $2 million yearly in advertising and as defense industry 
is the largest, its viewpoint is undoubtedly well represented. 59 Space, air- 
craft, and many other industries now have their own magazines, well prepared 
by experts, which are influential in industry, and also have a national 
circulation. 

Industry also supports all three national military organizations with 
advertising. These organizations are operated by retired officers for the most 
part. The Navy League is the oldest and smallest, having 25,000 members, was 
an early and consistent supporter of Polaris and aircraft carriers, and offered 
resistance to service unification. The Air F^rce Association, with 58,000 mem- 


58 Julius Duscha, "Arms and the Big Money Men," Harper's Magazine, March, 
1964, p. Z»3. 

59 James MacGregor Burns and Jack Walter Peltason, Government By The 
People, p. 298. 


53 


bers, has backed the Air Force position on bombers, missiles, and favored mili- 
tary unification and counterforce strategies. The Army Association, with 
55,000 members, advocates weapons for fighting ground warfare to include a larger 
standing Army. 60 

President Truroan said in 1945, "The veterans of this war are going to run 
the country." Veterans 1 organizations include the American Legion (the 
largest and most durable), Veterans of Foreign Wars, AMVETS, Disabled American 
Veterans, Disabled Officers Association and Retired Officers. In I960 the 

Veterans of World War I of the U.S.A., or "Wonnies," as they were known, headed 

62 
the list of lobby registrants, representing 930,000 persons. It is diffi- 
cult to gauge the effectiveness of the military associations and veterans 
organizations, as the legislators already are committed to maintenance of a 
large military-industrial complex. At one titr.s the veterans associations 
were considered among the most influential in Washington, but it is doubtful 
that this is still true; however, by concentrating on programs of direct 
benefit to their members, such as cash payments and tax benefits, their influence 
is for greater defense appropriations. 

Two organizations, though, th^t are powerful are the R0A (Reserve Officers' 
Association) and the National Gu3rd. The latter derives its importance from 
its close link to the community, its origin and its status as a state militia 
while the R0A gets a great deal of its importance from the fact that its member- 
ship includes over 70 Congressmen, five of whom are flag or field grade.^ The 
great majority of R0A members are businessmen, many of whom are influential in 
their community. It is not unreasonable to say that Senator Goldwater's interest 


Raymond, od. cit ., p. 192. 
°^Burns and Peltason, op_. cit., pps. 288-289, 
^Raymond, op. cit ., p. 193* 
°3Tristam Coffin, The Passion of the Hawks. Appendix I. 


54 


and promotion of manned bombers for the Air Force stems from his experience as 
a World War II bomber pilot and his continued training since then in the Air 
Force. The National Guard and ROA do not always accept the Pentagon's view, 
but the Congressional members of these organizations are at least susceptible 
to military indoctrination and as each of them, as a rule, is active in his 
own military organization, he is well informed on military objectives. As far 
as appropriations are concerned, the ROA and National Guard have had the sole 
effect of increasing them. 

Another lobbying group of importance is formed from the offices that each 
individual service maintains at the Capitol. Their job is to keep Congress 
informed and to solicit its interest in particular problems. With defense 
problems growing more complicated, this is an important and often worthwhile 
practice.°5 At the Pentagon are two supplemental organizations of rather large 
proportions. These are the legislative liaison representatives and the public 
relations organizations. These two offices handle a multitude of duties, including 
Congressional inquiries of all types, but they also execute vast public affairs 
programs consisting of press re. esses, pamphlets, documentary films, orientation 
trips for reporters, industrialists, and government officials, and arrangements 
for speakers throughout the country. The official count of military men per- 
forming these jobs in May 1963 was as follows: Office of Secretary of Defense, 
149; Army, 119; Navy, 99; Marine Corps, 24; and Air Force, 116, for a total of 
507; and in Legislative Liaison: Office of Secretary of Defense, 13; Army, 23; 
Navy and Marine Corps, 20; and Air Force, 40. 


*T*The Kansas City Star, Associated Press Dispatch, January 9, 1964, p. 1. 
6|Raymond, op. cit., p. 202. 
6& Ibid., p. 201~ 


55 


The focus of military activities in Congress is the appearance of the 
JCS (Joint Chiefs of Staff) and their aides before the committees to answer 
questions. It is doubtful if there will ever be hearings again similar to the 
Navy's defense of its aviation requirements in 19^9 against the administration's 
disposition to side with the Air Force. Undoubtedly this was lobbying of the 
most blatant type. Admirals presented lengthy, wel 1 -rehearsed statements and 
Captain Walter Karig, a reserve officer on active duty, held regular briefings 
for newsman. 67 This type of lobbying is simply not necessary in most cases but 
the publicity is usable. With industrialists applying pressure and making 
certain that Congressmen have all the information necessary to get contracts 
for their companies; with each service having ambitious officers on duty at 
the Capitol looking for ways to assist their service and also please Congress- 
men, and with large staffs in the Pentagon whose only job is to provide 
information to Congressmen and particularly friendly Congressmen; with 
Congressmen who also hold National Guard or Reserve commissions and who also 
have many friends at the Pentagon; only a disinterested legislator could 
fail to be well prepared to elicit the type of information he desires from 

a member of the JCS at a hearing. And of course, some questions are carefully 

— 68 

planted in advance with favorite and cooperative Congressmen. 

When Congressmen show particular prescience in extracting statements from 

the military inimical to the administration, the press often attributes this 

to leaks. This accusation may or may not be true, as a knowledgeable Congress 

has sufficient opportunities, as has been shown, to get all the information 

it desires. Furthermore, Congressmen are very adept at getting into the record!- 


6 7 Ibid ., p. 199. 
68ibid., p. 203. 


56 


statements to support their position. Recently McNamara called it a dis- 
grace that a secret vote of the JCS was, as he said, leaked to Congress. Han- 
son Baldwin said that this was nothing new, as it had happened innumerable times 
before, to his knowledge. 9 General Taylor says it is the duty of the military 
chiefs to tell Congress the truth while remaining loyal to the decisions of the 
President and the Secretary of Cefense. Howevsr, he says this is an impossible 
ethic to apply in practice. Congress listens attentively and seriously to the 
views of the Secretary of Defense. When the JCS or their aides appear, Congress' 
is not interested in hearing a repetition of the views of the administration. 
They are interested in the original views of the individual Chiefs, and partic- 
ularly in differences of opinion. This places the military men in impossible 
situations. They either appear to be withholding information from Congress, 
which Congress feels strongly entitled to receive and which, in many cases, 
they need in order to legislate wisely, or they appear to be opposing their 
civilian superiors. 

This situation has one effect on military appropriations— it tinds to 
increase them. Undoubtedly more and better defense is provided by Congressmen 
dedicated to Naval strategy, to manned bombers, to certain missile systems, and 
to the ground Army; but those often divergent interests also apply pressures in 
the opposite direction on a President or a Secretary of Defense trying to limit 
appropriations. New bomber funds approved by the Congress and never requested 
by the administration provide only the latest example of many similar appro- 
priations.^ 


Array-Mavy-Ai r Force Journal and Register , "Secretary McNamara Calls JCS 
QisgracefeV' December 21, 1963, p?s. 4, 13. 

7 n naxwell Taylor, The Uncertain Trumpet , pps. 111-114. General Taylor gives 
a frank discussion of the dilemma facing a member appearing before Congress. 

7'Kansas City Times, Associated Press Dispatch, March 10, 1964, p. 21. 


57 


Cultural or Spiritual Militarism 

To recapitulate, President Eisenhower sa-;d that the military-industrial 
complex was influential economically, politically, even spiritually throughout 
the country and that this influence provided the potential for misplaced power. 
It should now be evident that this complex has disturbing implications in the 
country economically and politically and implications of overriding economic 
control in some sections of the country, and that this combination, with the 
approval of the majority of Congress, has the opportunity for misplaced power 
and unwarranted influence. As to the allegation of spiritual effect on the 
country, President Eisenhower teemed to explain this by saying, "There is 
becoming a great influence, almost an insidious penetration of our minds, that 
the only thing this country is engaged in is weaponry and missiles. "'* 

If this interpretation is correct, President Eisenhower has some rather 
strange supporters, at least for a Republican President, who are using his 
speech as evidence of militarism in the United States. This group of thinkers 
are categorized in the "Arms Debate" by Robert A. Levins as the "anti-war" 
group.'-* While this group has many theories in disagreement, its members are to 
the left and liberal side of the American political spectrum. They seek, in 
the main, a political and military detente with Communism. They do not think 
that Communism is the greatest threat to the United States and that its threat 
is subordinate to the dangers of thermonuclear war. But there is general 
agreement among them that the United States is in danger of being dominated by 
a militaristic psychology and the political power of the military.' John M. 


' Public Papers of The President, Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1960-61, p. 1045. 

73Robert A. Levine, The Arms Debate . Throughout this book, in discussions 
of the "anti-war" group, you would expect Pres. Eisenhower to be on the opposite 
side and this is exactly where his beliefs place him on most questions. 

^Ibid., p. 215. 


58 


Swomley, Jr. has written a book, the thesis of which is that the new influence 

of the military is a result of conscious planning for power.'] Fred J. Cook, 

in "The Warfare State," used President Eisenhower's speech as the subject for 

his opening chapter and insists that the military has a vested interest in 

creating and prolonging tension, that its power is growing, and that the 

behind-the-scenes actions of the military are just as dangerous to democratic 

liberties as an actual coup d'etat . 7 ^ Senator Fulbright says, "The American 

—J 
people are not now exercising effective control over the military, and neither 

is Congress." 77 He further believes that the war on poverty, education-wel- 
fare programs, foreign cultural exchanges, and other domestic programs could 
be accelerated by eliminating supe-fluous defense funds. ^Associate Justice 
Douglas says that "we have taker: the military rather than the political approach 
to these world problems. . .thai: wo have becccr.e victims of the military mind. . . 
the civilian heads by and large are merely spokesmen for what the military 
want." 78 Mills says "The American Elite does not have any real image of peace- 
other than as an uneasy interlude existing precariously by virtue of the 
balance of mutual fright. The only accepted plan for 'peace' is the fully 
loaded pistol.^J 

It takes only a reading of one of the weekly news magazines or the daily 
paper to note that defense and related subjects is certainly the main subject 
in America. It is doubtful if even the subject of civil rights has occupied 
as many columns. With Vietnam, tha Congo, Cyprus, Cuba, NATO— America is 


7 5swornley, op_. cit., p. 7. 

7 °Cook, op_. cit .. This is a paraphrase o? the thesis of his book. 
77 Kansas City Star , Associated Press Dispatch, April 6, 1964, p. 9. 
78 William 0. Douglas, "Should We Fear Tha Military?", Look Magazine, March 


11, 1252, p. 34. 

79 Mills, op. cit. , p. 134. 


59 


deeply concerned, by necessity, with war or lack of peace. With announcements 
of new missiles, missile firings and new military scientific achievements appear- 
ing almost daily, it is easy to see how President Eisenhower and others would 
think that the country is thinking of nothing but conflict, weaponry, and missiles. 
With an average of $20 billion in defense contracts yearly, with each company 
trying to get maximum support for its proposal, with Congressmen determined 
that the publicity in their community will advertise their efforts, with almost 
continuous Congressional hearings concerning the defense budget or some other 
military subject, with the livelihood of entire communities determined by 
defense contracts, there is no doubt that America is preoccupied with defense. 

The prestige of the military has risen considerably since World War II. 
It was normal for military men to keep in the background. This is not so at 
present. The military leaders are in demand as speakers in all types of meetings, 
conventions and celebrations. According to Senator Fulbright, a 1958 NSC 
document authorized the military to hold seminars and to educate the public to 
the dangers of Communism. President Eisenhower says this is an error. Regard- 
less of the source from which the authority is derived, the military is involved 
to a considerable extent in such education. Senator Fulbright said in a speech 
before Congress that it was not tha job of the military to educate the public 
on political issues. This was for elected officials. He cited 11 instances of 
education and propaganda activities by military personnel. To quels the Senator: 

There are many indications that the philosophy of the program is repre- 
sentative of a substantial element of military thought and has great appeal 
to the military mind. A strong case can be made, logically, that this type 
of activity is the inevitable consequences of such a directive. There is 
little in the education, training, or experience of most military officers 


^°U. S. Cong. Senate, Special Preparedness Subcommittee of the Committee 
of Armed Services, Hearings Military Cold War Education and Speech Review Poll- 
cies, 87th Cong., 2nd Sess, (19°2), Part 1, p. 6. 


60 


to equip them with the baUnce of judgment necessary to put their own ulti- li 
mate solutions—those with which their education, training, and experience 
are concerned, ointo proper perspective in the President's total strategy for 
a nuclear age. / 

Among others. Senators Goldwater a;id Thurmond took exception to Fulbright's 

speech, saying that it was "shocking," that the military men were the most 

loyal and dedicated Americans, that they composed the best informed group on the 

dangers of the cold war and that, as the fight against Communism required a 

go 

total effort, they should be used to the maximum to educate the public. 

Perhaps Fulbright wasn't completely informed because, if he had been, he 
could have pointed to many more than these 11 cases of military support for 
cold war seminars or speeches to civilian groups about the dangers of Communism 
and he could also have pointed cut that one of the missions of the Industrial 
College of the Armed Forces is to present a two-weeks symposium, based on the 
material of its ten months course, to selected reserve officers, executives of 
industry and labor, representatives of business, professions, religion, education, 
agriculture, women's organizations, government, and community life. These 
seminars have been going on since 1948. The 5964-65 schedule includes 14 cities, 
with expected attendance of between 800 and 1000 for each two-week period. A 
partial list of the subjects covered are civil defense, counterinsu.-gency, space 
exploration, national security financing, geoeconomics, geopolitics^ international 
relations, mutual security, public opinion, techniques of Communis^;, technological 
progress, and organization and perspectives of national security. This compre- 
hensive program covers many subjects which, since World War II, have been 
considered in the province of the military. This program has been thoroughly 
investigated by Congress and passed the test. Both former Presidents, Eisenhower 


®lcono_. Rec , 87th Cong., 1st Sess. (1961), Vol. 107, Part II, p. 14433. 
53SJ.» P. 14398. 

"^ National Security Seminar, Presentation Outlines and Reading List, Indus- 
trial College of the Armed Force's, 1964-1965, pps. VIII, X. 

^•Owen G. Birt^stle, Personal Letter to Thomas J. Badger, 30 October 1964. 


61 


and Kennedy, enthusiastically endorsed the program. 85 In the foreword to the 

lesson manual for these seminars, President Johnson says, 

An enlightened citizenry is our greatest hope in meeting this 
challenge. It is the high mission of tha Industrial College of the 
Armed Forces to promote a broad understanding of the various elements of 
our national security— economic, political, and military. The College is 
a major instrument for instilling in growing numbers of our people the 
essential principles of a free society. ° 

These seminars have been received with high praise by the conferees. Two 

examples of many are from a Salt Lake City engineer who says, "It should be 

required for everyone in the teaching profession and a required course in 

every college in the country," and a New Orleans realtor who says, 

The seminars are an outstanding accomplishment on the part of the 
Industrial College to provide the civilian— industrialist— business- 
executive with comprehensive and timely data and statistics on U. S. andg^ 
world resources and on important influences in our nation and the world. 

It appears that the military are in the field of public education with the 

authority, cognizance, and approval of the President of the United States 

to include the political and economic factors that affect the security of the 

United States in connection with Communism, both as an external and internal 

threat. The extent to which the military has engaged in this educational 

effort is accepted with unstinting praise by the conferees who not only recommend 

its continuance but favor increased presentations so that more people can receive 

the instruction. Fulbright's criticism brought on a Congressional investigation 

with the result that Congress also approved of military efforts as follows: "That 

military participation in and support of proper and appropriate cold war or 

anti -Communist seminars for the public be continued." Furthermore the report 


^National Security, Seminar Prospectus--! S^k-oS , Industrial College of the 
Armed fl STorces, p. 3. 

"°Uational Security Seminar, on. cit ., p. XI. 

^Handout, What Others Have Said , Industrial College of Armed Forces. 


>»d 


62 


recognized that it is not the primary responsibility of the military to educate 
the public on the menace of Communism but, because of its experience and 
specialized knowledge, the military still has a legitimate function in this 
field. 88 

Besides the military being able to carry its thinking personally to the 
public, all three services have highly respected citizens, dedicated and patriotic, 
mostly retired, who tour the country at their own expense to tell the military 
story. In the Army these civilians are called "Civilian Aides to the Secretary 
of the Army". As examples of the type of man that serves in this capacity are 
Charles S. Stevenson, Civilian Aide for Western Missouri, who is also Chairman 
of the Board of Hallmark Cards, Edward C. Logelin, Vice-President, United States 
Steel Corporation from Chicago, Walter K. Koch, President, Mountain States 
Telephone and Telegraph Company from Colorado, John Slezak, Chairman of the 
Board, Kable Printing Company from Chicago, Kermit R. Hansen, Vice-President, 
U. S. National Bank of Omaha and Carlisle P. Runge, Special Assistant to the 
President, University of Wisconsin. They receive special briefings and are well 
qualified to present the military picture. 

Civil Defense presents another important aspect of the "cold war" which 
has been given little attention but is an area which extends the military's 
influence into cities, counties, and states. At the present time, planning 
for Civil Oefense is a responsibility of OEP (Office of Emergency Planning) 
whose head is a member of the NSC, but operations are under the Defense Depart- 
ment where a civilian is also in charge. But the Army, Navy, and Air Force 
have important operational missions and in an emergency their duties would 


U. S. Cong. Senate, Report by Special Preparedness Subcommittee of the 
Committee on Armed Services, Military Cold War Education and Speech Review 
Policies , 87th Cong., 2d Sess., p. 7, #. 


63 


increase. No one doubts that the military would be needed badly in a 
thermonuclear exchange involving the continental United States. In this 
cold war interim there are many advocates of more military activity in this 
sphere, of military responsibility being as much a part of national security 

as training soldiers, sailors, and airmen, and of close coordination and 

89 
planning between the military and local civilians. 

The Defense Department publishes 125 different kinds of indoctrination 
pamphlets, books, magazines, and newspapers each year with a total distribu- 
tion of eight million copies. For the most part these are scrupulously 

handled to avoid giving servicemen and their families any feeling of propaganda 

90 
intent, even in international affairs. The Pentagon is busy in other fields. 

In the Audio-Visual Division it is continually assisting private producers of 

film projects and television seriais which, at this time, number 35 and 10 

respectively. It also extends assistance to documentaries prepared for school 

use and to cartoon strips, such as "Steve Canyon" and "Terry and The Pirates" 

which show a consistent partiality for Air Force doctrine. Over a five-year 

period the Air Force Book Branch claimed credit for spawning more than four 

hundred air and space books. At a recent date, more than 115 volumes were 

under commercial contract. One such project, The Manned Missile , The Story of 

the B-70 by Ed Rees, who was former military correspondent for Time was written 

at the express suggestion of the Chief of the Air Force Book Branch. Ed Rees 

91 

now works for the manufacturer of the B-70. 


^Herman Kahn, On Thermonuclear War, pps. 626-6it0. 
5°Raymond, op_. cit ., p. 133. 
9'Cater. od. cit.. dds. 33-3 1 *. 


'Cater, op_. cit ., pps. 33-3 1 *. 


(A 


In I960 there were 248 colleges and universities with Array ROTC (Reserve 
Officer Training Corps) programs which enrolled a total of 155,871 cadets.^ 2 
These do not include institutions with Air Force and Navy ROTC programs. These 
cadets are the chief source of officers for the services and every opportunity 
is used to indoctrinate these cadets toward a military career. In addition, 
the three million men in the services receive special indoctrination. Over 
one-half of all young men in the United States will have had some type of military 
training. The Army Reserve, not even counting Air Force and Navy, has 442,000 
Ready Reservists, 270,000 in Standby Reserve, and 20,000 students who are not 
in a Reserve unit. The Army National Guard maintains a strength of 400,000. 
Retired military personnel in 1S45 were 180,000 and have grown at, least at a 
rate of 10,000 a year. In 1955 alone, 2,000 officers retired and took another 
job in industry.93 The services have plenty of opportunity to penetrate the 
minds of Americans with military thinking. 

Our educational institutions, which have long prided themselves upon a 
tradition of freedom of thought and action, have also been invaded by the 
military through defense contracts for research and development. While not 
a subject of this paper, this danger is also treated in President Eisenhower's 
speech. It is sufficient to state that, with Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology receiving nearly $75 million in defense research money and Harvard 
receiving 25% of its income (more than $21 million) from Federal funds," 
there is the potential that government contracts become so important to the 
educational institution that its freedom of thought may be impaired. 


° 2 Swomley, op . cit. , p. 28. 
93nebert Committee, passim . 
^Raymond, op. cit ., pps 139-141. 


65 


Summary 

Military thinking is paramount in the United States today. The 196*t 
Presidential election dramatized this. Both candidates, Johnson and Goldwater, 
said that the subject of peace end ..ar was the single most important issue. 
The continuance of the cold war with its thermonuclear possibilities has 
made it absolutely necessary thet the United States remain ahead in all 
scientific developments so that no "breakthrough" will give the U.S.S.R. a 
commanding position of strength in international power politics and has 
created an interconnected military-industrial-scientific team that appears 
invulnerable. The costs of this dsfense establishment, and particularly of 
the military equipment involved, affect every governmental budgetary decision. 
Entire communities are dependent upon defense industry. Military man hold 
prominent positions in practically every defense industry, including those 
industries mainly research in nature, in the country. Military implications 
are considered in all national governmental decisions and, in international 
relations, these considerations undoubtedly receive priority. Military men are 
used generously throughout the federal govern >ent in position of responsibility. 

The prestige the military has traditionally enjoyed for a short time 
immediately after a war, only to find this prominence receding to unimportance 
in peacetime, continued to grow after World War II, enhanced by the Korean War, 
the Vietnamese combat, and most significantly by the cold war until now its 
leaders are influential in all areas of society. The size of the armed forces 
and their deployment all over the world, with the requirement for large 
reserves, has a personal effect upon practically every home in the country. 

The relationship of the military and industry to Congress has been 
completely changed. Congressmen, in many cases, now seek the support of the 


66 


military to bring industry to their communities. This all-pervasive military 
atmosphere combined with the actual military presence and the si2e of the 
military-industrial complex presents untold opportunities for misplaced power 
and unwarranted influence. Furthermore, the ingredients for traditional 
militarism are undoubtedly present. However, the opportunity for misplaced 
power and unwarranted influence does not prove that the opportunity has been 
used. Nor does the presence of the ingredients that have produced militarism 
in other states rule out the possibility that this country has inherent 
traits and governmental methods thst are safeguarding the democratic processes 
of the nation. These aspects krtll be considered next. 


CHAPTER IV 

MISCONCEPTIONS AND SAFEGUARDS 

What is meant by "the military"? Is it limited to the professional 
officer, or does it include every man in uniform, willingly or unwillingly, 
active, retired, or reserve, or does it embrace the entire military establishment 
from the Secretary of Defense to the lowest paid civilian? Does Secretary 
McNamara represent the civilian control of the military or is he merely a part 
of the military chain-of-conmand? What is meant by civil -military relations? 
Discussion of these questions is not purely semantic but should prove valuable 
in determining whether there are inherent safeguards in our government operating 
against tlfe formation of a militaristic state. Similarly a new ideology is 
evolving in industry. This new ideology of social responsibility must be 
examined as to its validity and contrasted with the generally accepted doctrine 
of American capitalism to see if this new doctrine represents a different 
influence than expected within the complex. 

The Military 

The armed forces consist of a conglomeration of professionals, reservists, 
draftees, and enlistees as well as Presidential appointees and civil servants. 
In discussing the military, only the opinions, ideas, and actions of the leaders 
who are influential in making decisions or forming policy are of importance 
as far as the military-industrial complex is concerned. These are the Presidential 
appointees and the top men among military professionals and in Civil Service. 
The civilian secretaries represent the military point of view in government 
councils but symbolize the civilian control within the military establishment. 
No difficulty in this regard is experienced until civil -military relations are 


68 


considered. Congress and the press arc most apt to draw a sharp line between 
the two if there seems to be any difference of opinion. The term military, in 
this thesis, intends no distinction between the military and civilian portions 

of the military establishment unless so specified. 

There is a similar misunderstanding in regard to military influence. 

Military factors are considered by the State Department in making foreign policy. 

Military security may be the dominant factor but as Burton M. Sapin and Richard 

C. Snyder state: 

It is quite possible that United States foreign policy could be 
overbalanced toward military objectives or the use of military techniques 
without this necessarily being a result of Military Establishment thinking 
or influence. It is interesting to note that oftentimes some members of 
Congress are more prone to ar-;ue for quid;, military solutions of problems 
than the high-ranking officers who testify before their coimiittees. 1 

It is also noteworthy that foreign policy is not the only area in which 

military decisions may be principally civilian. George C. Marshall is considered 

the prime mover for UMT but this does not concur exactly with President Truman 

who considered this program as his own and concluded his account by stating, 

I am morally certain that: if Congress had enacted this program 
in 19^5, when I first reconr nended it, we would have had a poo', of basically 
trained men, which would have caused the Soviets to hesitate and perhaps 
not bring on the Berlin crisis or the Korean aggression. 

In judging decisions and influences that are military in character it must 

be recognized that they may or may not be espoused or originated within the 

military establishment. 


Burton M. Sapin and Richard C. Snyder, The Role of the M ilitary in American 

Foreign Policy , p. 23. 

2Harry S. Truman, The Memoirs of Harry S. Truman: Years of Tr -:a1 and Hope, 
p. 55. c - 


69 


Types of Militarism 

Militarism is flourishing throughout the world today. It has practically 
as many different faces as ther^ rre militaristic countries. Each country has 
its own brand of militarism, but all militaristic countries, whether China under 
Mao Tse-tung, Indonesia under Sukarno, Ghana under Kwame Nkrumah, Ethiopia 
under Haile Selaissie, Yugoslavia under Tito, Egypt under Gamal Abdel Nassar, 
Pakistan under Ayub Khan, Algeria under Ahmed Ben Bella, or the Congo under 
Moise Tshombe, possess one distinguishing characteristic— they are all dictator- 
ships. A militaristic state and a dictatorship are synonomous. Either the 
military is the dictator or the dictator controls the military. 

Prior to World War II the Axis Powers (Csrmany, Japan, Italy) were all 
militaristic in different ways. Germany under Hitler was predominantly a 
civilian dictatorship; Italy under Mussolini was a broad-based dictatorship 
having both military and civilian -upportj Jcpan was strictly a military 
dictatorship— at first the top governmtnt positions were held by civilians and 
controlled by the military, but arter Pearl Harbor the military took over in 
name as well as in fact. Except for East Germany where the U.S.S.R. was in 
control, militarism was eliminated from these three countries after World War II. 
But in Eastern Europe civilian dictatorships were employed by Russia, except in 
Yugoslavia where Marshal Tito was able to maintain independence from Russia and 
was both the military and political leader. 

Militarism can occur in a variety and combination of ways. The coup d'etat 
is the most coranon in underdeveloped countries. Two occurred in 1964 in Latin 
America. In Bolivia General Rone Sarrientos Ortuno ousted the government of 
President Victor Paz Extenssorc^ and in Brazil President (General) Humberto 


3 "Huge Task in Bolivia," Kansas City Ster, New York Times News Service, 
November 3, 1964, p. 12A. 


70 


Castelo Branco replaced Joao Goutart as head of the government. A recent 
article by General Benjamin Rattenbach of Argentina says that the theory of 
militarism is changing in United States and that by some authorities it is 
being recognized that the military is the only group to foster peace and order 
and necessary in order to prevent chaos. The United States accepts the theory 
that some dictatorships may represent the only available solution, as the 
military represents the only source of stability; but the U.S. also hopes the 
result of a military dictatorship will ultimately be an initial step toward 
democracy. Examples are Pakistan and South Korea. 

However, militarism can come gradually, as has happened in Saudi Arabia 
where, after several years of gradual reduction of King Saud's power, Prince 
Faisal has finally assumed total power. The rare politically sophisticated 
a country is, the longer it usually takes for a new dictator to replace 
another one or for a dictatorship .:o succeed cnother form of government. In 
some cases the change takes a period of years, the steps being perhaps inpercep- 
tible by the people concerned. Military thought can become so persuasive that 
military solutions appear to be the only acceptable ones in areas not normally 
considered of military concern and, in the most important area of economics, 
military aims can become the vested interests of a majority of the people. 
Regardless of how militarism arrives, whether gradually or suddenly, and 
regardless of its type or form it is inimical to democracy and to bo avoided, as 


^Clarence U. Hall, "The Country That Saved Itself," Readers' Digest, Decem- 
ber, 1964, pps. 135-158. This article is entirely complimentary of the role 
played by the military in this c ou-3 d'etat . 

^Lt. Gen. Benjamin Rattenbach, "The Military Sector of Society," Military 
Revievj, July 1964, p. 82. 

""Where a Friend of the West Runs Things Now," U. S. News and Vtorld Report , 
November 16, 1964, p. 20. 


71 


a peril to liberty and freedom. 

President Eisenhower in his farewell address and other speeches repeatedly 

emphasized concern with government centralization at the national level. Without 

centralization, militarization cannot be effective. A military organization 

is centrally controlled, with orders emanating from the top and proceeding down 

through all echelons. Centralization undoubtedly increases the opportunity 

for militarization. To repeat the most typical of President Eisenhower's 

frequent statements on the subject: 

It has long been my judgment that the real threat to liberty in this 
republic will not come from any sudden calculated onslaught. Rather the 
threat to our liberties will be primarily found in a steady erosion of 
self-reliant citizenship and in excessive power concentration resulting 
from the lodging of more and r-^re decision in an ever growing federal 
bureaucracy.' 

As was noted, the President did no: mention the military-industrial complex by 
name, but as the defense Oepartaiini is tha largest bureaucracy in the federal 
government, it is certainly implied in his statement. Further, frow this 
statement it cannot be proved exactly what Eisenhower means by "sudden calcu- 
lated onslaught." If perchance any news analyst had thought there was a 
possibility that Eisenhower was alluding to internal military threat, his comments 
would have created news of rather a momentous nature. But proof that the Pres- 
ident believes that the military presents no threat to our established government 
can best be shown by his own words before a Stiate Committee: 

I, for one, want to be on record as expressing my indestructible 
faith and pride in our armed services~avan though their loyalty, 
patriotism, and breadth of understanding .ieed no defense from me or 
anyone else. . .In a half century of national service, I have yet to 
meet the American military officer, who viewed himself as a budding 
Napoleon or even a Rasputin. 


?"The Real Threat to Liberty as Ike Sees It," U. S. News and World Report , 
Hay 12, 1962, p. 15. 

"U.S. Cong. Senate Preparedness Subcommittee of the Committee of Armed 
Services, Hearings Military Cold W<~r and S peech Review Policies, 87th Cong., 2d 
Sess. (196^; p. /. Hereafter reference to these hearings or the report will be 
"Senate Military Cold War Educate Hearings or Report" as the case may be. 


S. E. Finer, In The Man On Horseback, says that militarism is least 
likely in a country in which, first, military professionalism is high, second, 
civilian control is accepted by the military, and third, the public attachment 
to civilian institutions is strong." These three conditions exist in the 
United States to a greater degree than in any other country with the possible 
exception of countries such as England and Canada with long democratic traditions. 
However, Finer's first two points, although this author considers them correct, 
should not be accepted without additional evidence. 

Professionalism and Politics 

The professional man is an expert with specialized knowledge and skill 
in a significant field of hurr.an endeavor. . . .The professional man is a 
practicing expert, working in a social context, and performing a service, 
such as the promotion of haalth, education, or justice, which is essential 
to the functioning of society. 

The skill of the officer is neither a craft (which is primarily 
mechanical) nor an art (which requires unique and nontransferable talent). 
It is instead an extraordinarily complex intellectual skill requiring 
comprehensive study and training. It must be remembered that the peculiar 
skill of the officer is the management of violence not the act of violence 
itself. Firing a rifle, for instance, is basically a mechanical craft; 
directing the operations of a rifle company requires an entirely different 
type of ability which may in part be learned from books and in part from 
practice and experience. The intellectual content of the military profession 
requires the modern officer to devote about one-third of his professional 
life to formal schooling, probably a higher ration 6f educational time to 
practice time than in any other profession. In part this reflects the 
limited opportunities of the officer to acquire practical experience in the 
most important elements of his vocation. But to a large degree it also 
reflects the extreme complexity of the military expertise.' 

The outstanding professionalism of the Arierican officer is recognized 

throughout the world. American professional i:.m consists both of technical 

expertise in sophisticated weapons as well as its theoretical application. 

Entire foreign units, as well as many officer.; and non-commissioned officers, 


S. E. Finer, The Han On Horseback, pps. 21-26. 
lOsamuel P. Huntington, The Soldier and the State, pps. 8, 9, and 13. 


73 


come to the branch schools. This attendance could be attributed to the fact 
that American military equipment is used throughout the world and the Americans 
have always had mechanical ability. Eighty foreign officers from fifty nations 
(including all NATO allies except Iceland) graduated from the Army Command and 
General Staff College in 1965. 11 This is a school of classroom instruction 
which trains officers for duty at the Division and Army Group level. Wide 
acceptance by allies at both the theoretical and operational military schools 
is certainly an indication of an outstanding professional reputation. Also, as ' 
the United States is in most Western political alliances, their military 
leadership also becomes American. The prestige of our government, and the 
fact that the American military commitment is the largest, gives the American 
officer preeminence. 

Just as the primary responsibility of a physician is to his patient, and 
that of a lawyer to his client, the primary responsibility of a military 
officer is to his country. He is an expert in fighting wars, in the management 
and organization of violence. As Samuel P. Huntington, one of the ablest 
critics of the military establishment, says, "The motivations of the officer 

are a technical love for his craft and the sense of social obligation to 

12 
utilize his craft for the benefit of society." Economic incentives are not a 

motivating force, but Finer overstates the case in listing poverty among the 

virtues of the military, as far as the American military man is concerned. 

To obtain an officer of the requisite caliber, the country provides reasonable 

economic security for him and his family. 


"phone call between author and Secretary of the Command and General Staff 
qe, June 16, 1965. 
2 Huntington, op_. cit. , p. 15. For a more complete discussion of the 


military as a profession, see pps. 17-18. 
13Finer, op_. cit ., p. 10. 


74 


The officer remains a professional as long as he stays within his own 
field of competence. If an officer becomes interested in politics to the ex- 
tent that his actions are affected by the intrigues and maneuvering^ common 
to professional politicians, he has not only cone to his country and to the 
entire military organization a disservice, but he has undoubtedly compromised 
his professional judgment. An officer's advice, to be accepted, must be based 
on military considerations without reservation. Hills says that the renunciation 
of political power is a part of tho military point of honor.' 

It is drummed into every military manager in the course of his not 
inconsiderable education, from the day he enters West Point to the day 
death makes him eligible for an Arlington burial with honors, that he is 
to back away from anything resembling a jolitical decision.'^ 

Further he states, 

There is no doubt abot.t it, there £i a now Republican and Democratic 
generals. There is also, ; s e now know well, officers who are for or 
against individual Senators - uch as KcC. rthy™ and who in their military 
positions lean one way or the other to reveal it or to hide it. 10 

To cite McCarthy as the single example of a trend toward partisan politics by 

the military is certainly inadequate. McCarthy was not a character who 

inspired neutrality and pro-McCarthyism, if prevalent in the military (for 

which there is no proof), at least turned to cnti-McCarthyism after the Army 

hearings. Military officers are expected and even urged to vote. The Defense 

Department yearly carries on an intensive campaign to get out the military 

vote by absentee ballot. This is considered to be democratic. Many officers 

vote and many do not. It is well known that Eisenhower inferred he had 

never voted in his life until after World War II in 1948, and President Truman 

was enough In doubt as to the General's politics to try to persuade him to 


'^C. Wright Mills, The Power Elite , p. 174. 
15ibid., footnote, p. 200. 
lojbid., p. 204. 


75 

run for President on the Democratic ticket as late as December, 1951. 
Eisenhower is no different from most officers who admit or even boast they have 
never voted. '^ Perhaps Mills is concerned about the close friendship existing 
between senior officers and members of Congress, although he does not pinpoint 
any such relationships. For senior military officers and senior Congressmen to 
get to know each other during official business and thereby to gain mutual respect 
resulting in an even closer friendship, particularly when their beliefs coincide, 
is only natural. There appears nothing sinister in this type of association. 
On the other hand, if a Senator or Congressman strongly supports the military 
or a particular service, there is no doubt that the military officers, or the 
officers of that particular service, may voice their Hkes or dislikes. Not 
to indicate satisfaction under such conditions would be unnatural. And, as 
Mills himself claims, only the very few military officers at the top are in 
a position to influence decisions.^ This latter fact seems to limit the 
relevance of his argument considerably. 

Approximately half our Presidents have had military experience and three, 
(excepting Washington) Taylor, Grant, and Eisenhower, were career soldiers. 
The military careers of Jackson, Harrison, and possibly Garfield and the first 
Roosevelt, assisted their political careers. This would seem to indicate that 
the Presidency and military experience are closely allied. But the reverse is 
more near the truth: military officers are poor politicians. Americans seem to 
trust military heroes, but that politically successful military men sought high 
governmental elective office is unsubstantiated. Rather, politicians have 
capitalized on the popularity ard reputations of military men for political 


17 Dwight D. Eisenhower, Kar.da te For Chanc y, p. 79. 
,8 Jack Raymond, Power In The Pentagon, p.~170. 
19Mills, 0£. cit., p. 231. 


76 


purposes. True, there have been military men ambitious politically-Scott 
in 1852, McClelland in 1864, Hancock in 1880, Dewey in 1904, Wood in 1920, 
and MacArthur in 19^8, but all were defeated and it is most important that 
not one attempted to organize the military for political purposes. 

Since World War II there have been military chiefs who have challenged the 
President on specific items of policy, particularly Admiral Louis Denfield, 
Chief of Naval Operations under Truman, and General Matthew Ridgway, Army 
Chief of Staff under Eisenhower. 20 These challenges were on military matters 
and not politically inspired. Both resigned, wrote books, and are now 
practically forgotten by most of the public. Neither had a political following. 
It is also known that General Haxwel 1 Taylor disagreed with President Eisenhower. 
He also wrote a book that President Kennedy supposedly read and approved. He 
was brought back into the administration finally to become Chairman of the JCS 
and is now Ambassador to Vietnam. His very few speeches have been exceptionally 
circumspect, restricted entirely to military implications and non-controversial 
policy-making. While he may be a Democrat, this fact could not be definitely 
proved through any of his actions, speeches, or writings. Senator Fulbright, 
as critical as he is of military influence in national affairs, says that mili- 
tary involvement has not been a quest for power. 21 Even Mills says that the 
military are not out for political power but tliat they enter the political realm 
unwillingly, after having been forced to take a political stand because of 

22 
civilian default." »_j I 


20 Samuel P. Huntington, The Ccnrnon Defense , p. 115. 

21 Cong.. Rec., 87th CongreTs," 1st Sess. (1961), Vol. 107, Part 12, p. 1<M3. 

22 MTlls, od. cit., pps. 200-201. 


77 


If a political campaign ev^r seemed to o; : fer the military an opportunity 
to experss their opinion, it was the Presidential campaign of 1964. Senator 
Goldwater employed a report from the House Republican Policy Committee which 
promised each service a weapons system that each had urgently reccrr.-nended 
as necessary but that had been -ejected or postponed by McNamara and he used 
another report from a task fore: leaded by a ."ormer Secretary of Defense and 
including, among others, two reiired members of the JCS--a11 members of the 
Eisenhower team. 2 ^ President John! on answered these charges, but ficNamara and 
other civilian members of the Democratic administration reinforced the President 
in much more detail. It was reported that th's election had involved the mili- 
tary more than any other previous election and that top-ranking military officers 

24 
were unhappy with the Pentagon becoming involved in partisan politics. In 

none of the sources 2 ^ used has there appeared a single case of a tcp-ranking 

officer in uniform and on active duty supporting or not supporting a partisan 

issue. Military officers have reiterated their testimony before Congress when 

asked, but their speeches suppo.-tcd views which, though partisan as to service, 

had been previously stated. This problem as already explained, is a question 

of semantics and it recurs often. The word "military" was used to represent the 

views of the Pentagon. No distinction was made between the civilien members 

and the men in uniform. No man in uniform publicly supported the Goldwater 

thesis. 26 


2 ^G0P "Charges a Nuclear Lag," Associated Press Dispatch, The Kansas City 
Times , October 12, 1964, p. 22. See also notes 4 and 5, and pps. 9 and 10 of 
Chapter II. 

^"Washington Whisper," U. S. News S- World Report, September 21, 1964, p. 31. 

25see page 7. 

""The Nuclear Issue," Newsweek, September 21, 1964, p. 34. 


78 


It was true that retired officers did encage in the campaign. General 

Thomas 0. White, retired Chief of Staff of the Air Force says, 

Currently a number of retired generals and admirals, genuinely per- 
turbed about America's status in world affairs, are taking active part 
in the political campaign. It would be possible to have a situation in 
which the actively serving senior generals and admirals espouse the poli- 
tics of the 'ins' and a group of retired officers constitute an opposing 
military view for the 'outs' .' 

This did not happen in the \$6k campaign because the "ins" kept quiet or con- 
fined their remarks to previously stated positions already on record before 
Congressional committees. If such a controversy ever materialized, it would 
have a deleterious effect on the "professionalism" of the military and also 
injure our country. While it is not too important to differentiate between 
civilian and military between elac.ions, as their policies theoretically 
should coincide, it would be wall .or informed citizens to make this distinction 
during elections. 

General White, expressed the accepted military view on political questions 
as follows: 

When a man enters the military career he knowingly enters a field which 
with respect to politics is a narrow one. I consider that in this connec- 
tion the military career represents almost a polar extremity from that of 
the politician's career. 

If the military man is compelled by conscience to speak out, either in 
contravention of policy or the propriety which must govern the man in uni- 
form, let him leave the service. This often is a hard choice but I see no 
alternative under our systen of government. Such a man can be indeed, a 
patriot and a fearless leader; public opiiion will at a rainimu.; applaud 
his courage even though it might not be converted to his views = 


27 Gen. Thomas D. White, USA, Retired, "Tho Military and Politics: A Dan- 
gerous Mixture," Newsweek, October 19, 1964, p., 33. 
1 Senate Military War Education Hearings, p. 5. 


79 


Foreign Policy, National Security Council, and The Bureau of the Budget 

John J. McCloy said, "The isolationism of the 1920-19^0 period produced 
a vacuum of political objectives. The State Department did not have, indeed 
it was not encouraged to have, any political aims in the world." 9 During this 
period the military prepared officers for functions that went beyond the training 

and directing of combat forces. It is not agreed that the military performed 

30 
well, but they seemed to be the best planners available. Walter Millis says: 

The Second World War. . »had inextricably intermingled the civilian 
and the military components on all the higher levels of policy-making; 
and the difficult future into which we were gazing as the war ended 
seemed to offer little hope that they could ever be fully separated. In 
1945 the stage was filled with civilians r.ore militaristic than the 
military, and with military men— like Marshall, Eisenhower, Bradly and 
a host of others— with a breadth of view on national and world problems 
which often made them seem more 'civilistic' than the civilians. It 
was no longer clear that the substitution of a politician or businessman 
for a professional soldier at.any given post of command would necessarily 
affect the course of policy. 

After World War II the military establishment regularly submits its 

recommendations on economic and political matters and probably has a predominant 

role in military economic aid. Its administrative roles in places like South 

Korea and Berlin and in formulating position papers for international conferences 

considering Japanese terms of surrender, for the Truman Doctrine in 19*»7, for 

NATO (North American Treaty Organization) and for many other ... .led Hasland 

and Radway to say, 

To limit the purpose ;:nd scope of war requires the closest cooperation 
between military and diplonatic personnel. To attain national security 
objectives without resort to war requires a national strategy in which the 
disposition of military forces is integrated with political bargaining, 


"Raymond, op . cit., p. 68. 
3°Loc. cit . 
3'Walter Millis, Arms and the State, p. 140. 


80 


policy statements, alliances, foreign economic policy, propaganda, and 
any and all measures that nay foster the growth of friendly factions 
within foreign governments. In either case the role of the military 
officer of tomorrow will be even less conventional than the role he has 
played in the recent past. ;2 

To carry out this increased participation of the military in foreign 
affairs the Secretary of Defense h^s an Assistant Secretary for International 
Security Offices with Lt. Gen. Robert Wood (1SS5) as a Deputy. Each service has 
an organization dealing with international affairs. Some have argued that 
this military involvement in foreign policy indicates a lack of civilian control 
but, as Walter Hillis observes, it is not a matter of restoring civilian control 
over the military establishment bui of integrating military factors, forces, 
and plans with civil diplomacy ?.nd domestic policy. 33 As General Maxwell 
Taylor states, "The military are entitled by law and right to a seat at the 
national table— there to advise,, not to dominate or command. " 3; t The military 
position is to clarify political alternatives and to show the military 
implications of alternate courses of action. After policy has beer, determined, 
the military implements it but does not change it. 

Some misunderstanding exists as to the actual military influence in our 
government. The NSC by law is the organization which recommends national policy 
to the President. The Secretary of Defense is responsible for the military 
point of view. Unless specifically requested, the JCS do not advisa the 
President directly; in fact, their advice goes to the Secretary of defense. 
By law, either the Chairman or any member of the JCS has the authority to go to 
the President with a matter he deems of sufficient importance. This would be an 


32 John W. Kasland and Lawr;nce I. Radway, Soldiers and Scholars; Military 
Education and National Policy , >. 26. 

JJHillis, op. cit., p. \k2, 

3'tyiaxwell 0. Taylor, "What Really Takes '.'lace in The Pentagon Engine Room," 
Army-Navy-Ai r Force Journal and R egister , February 29, 196**, p. 13. 


81 


extreme measure and, if used very often, would destroy relationships, making 
removal of either the military or civilian involved necessary. It is granted 
that on many occassions the Chairman of the JCS does advise the President 
personally, but this depends upcn the wishes of the President. Organizationally 
the JCS have no direct access to the President or the NSC, where the actual 
national decisions are made. 

The same is true of the budget. It is not a budget made by the man in 
uniform. It is a military budget made by the civilians in charge of the mili- 
tary. The individual services present their budgets to civilian comptrollers 
and civilian secretaries. The JCS reviews the budget and makes recommenda- 
tions to a Defense Comptroller who presents it to the Secretary of Defense, a 
civilian. Of course, if the Chief of any of the services, or his civilian 
Secretary, has reservations on the budget, a wise Secretary of Defense gives 
each service a complete hearing, but the decision nevertheless is civilian. 
From here the budget goes to tht Bureau of the Budget, where it is integrated 
into the overall national budget, entirely a civilian product, and the 
Bureau of the Budget presents the overall budget to the President, 'ho submits 
it to Congress. Both in money matters and poiicy, the man in uniform is 
isolated organizationally from the decision-nuking body unless his personal 
advice is requested. As a matter of practice, the military chiefs :-.ave no trouble 
in having their recommendations reviewed. The Secretary of Defense undoubtedly 
presents substantive non-concurrences of the Chiefs of services to the President 
or the NSC. Congress would be quick to ferret out any such lack of consideration 
of a military recommendation by either the Secretary of Defense or one of the 
Service Secretaries, or by any of their civilian subordinates. 

One of our national objectives is to prevent the spread of Corr.nunismj 


32 


another is the maintenance of free world alliances. The press for the most 

part (but public figures and authors military as well as civilian) popularized 

various names to indicate the military strategies to accomplish these objectives. 

First, it was "containment," then "massive retaliation," and now it is "flexible 

response," which includes "limited warfare," "mutual deterrence," and "balance 

of terror." Certainly none of these terms produces an image of peace, which 

is another national objective. The country as a whole is preoccupied with 

the problem of security. Several of these terms may produce a feeling of 

security in some people and certainly insecurity in others, but for all, these 

descriptive terms are warlike terms. In the minds of many Americans these terms 

are attributed to military leaders. This is ;iot entirely right. The military 

is not responsible for these te,-ms nor for the national objectives connected 

with them, although the military undoubtedly participated in formulation of the 

policies. Rightfully, George Kennan, former U. S. Ambassador to the U.S.S.R. 

and Yugoslavia, is responsible for the "containment" policy.35 "Massive 

retaliation" was the policy of Eisenhower and was popularized by the press as 

the policy of his Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles. However, theoreticians 

such as Dr. Robert Strauz-Hupe, Colonel (Retired) William R. Kintner, Stefan 

T. Possony, and many others are responsible for outlining the ramifications of 

this policy.'' "Flexible response" is the term representing the Kennedy policy. 

Ho less authoritative a person than General H:,xwell D. Taylor says 

that the public first was to receive intimations of the limitations 

of dependence on a nuclear strategy. . . .(These writings) fro.n unofficial 


35 

^Huntington, op_„ crt., p. 15. 

■> 6 Robert A. Levfne, The Arns Debate , p. 77. 


83 


sources represented the first public questioning of the validity of the 
New Look policy of Massive Retaliation and I welcomed them warmly. Their 
acuity was all the more remarkable from the fact that the authors did not 
have access to complete information with regard to atomic weapons effects.- 3 ' 

Henry Kissinger, Robert Osgood, William W. Kaufman, and others, educators 
employed by civilian educational institutions or scholarly research organiza- 
tions, deserve the credit for not only originating but explaining these policies 
to the country. It is true that the Army had been interested in limited warfare 
for some time but, despite all Army efforts to get its policies considered in 
official circles, the public retrained mostly unaware that a debate which would 
alter the entire structure of the armed forces was going on behind Pentagon 
walls. 38 

In late 1964 there was an argument in NATO over MLF (multinational 
nuclear force), a proposal supported by the United States and Germany, and 
opposed firmly by France and, to a lesser degree, by Great Britain. The author 
of this proposal is Prof. Robert R. Bowie, Director of Harvard's Center for 
International Affairs. 39 Undoubtedly MLF was an administration concept and 
supported by the military, but to give credit to the military for originating the 
proposal is giving the military too much credit. In budgetary matters, deter- 
mination of national objectives, foreign policies, and even military strategy, 
it does not appear that the military are as influential as generally believed. 
At the highest levels the military, for the most part, is represented by the 
Secretary of Defense. There has been a gradual change since World War II, when 


^Huntington, op_. cit ., p. 34B. 

38 Loc. cit. . 

39"Mi'nuet of the Powers," Newsweek, Novo .bar 9, 1964, pps. 46-50. 

'♦"Raymond, op_. cit. pps. 2^3-24B. There are many discussions of who ori- 
ginated what aspect of U. S. policy. This citation is in agreement with the 
facts as presented. It is not particularly important who originated these 
concepts but the point being made is that it was not a man in uniform but the 
State Dept., civilian educators, or research institutions. 


8k 


the man in uniform was more influential than the civilian Secretaries. 

Civil -Military Relations 

There are few principles more honored and respected in this country than 

civilian control of the military. The speeches and writings of the framers of 

our Constitution showed a keen interest in this subject and all agreed that 

the military should be subordinate to civil power. 

A fear of the military ■ rooted in American traditions. The 
framers of the Constitution, recognizing that military domination was in- 
compatible with free government, wove into ihe Constitution several pre- 
cautions, ' 

Congress controls the purscj the President directs the sword. Congress 
declares war; the President runs it. Cong: ,ss appropriates the r,.oney and 
determines the size, structure, and organization of the fighting forces; 
the President is the commander in chief of ;hese forces.^ 2 

Most authorities agree that in thi.; r.anner the framers provided for civilian 
control in the Constitution. 

Huntington presents the argument that the separation of powers works 
against objective civilian control; that the framers believed in a citizen Army 
that would rise up when necessary with the officers coming from the leaders of 
the nation who, in many cases, would be meabers of the national legislature. 
T:ie framers chief concern was that politicians wculd gain military control. 
They did not even envisage a separc.te military Cass. Jefferson condo ined the 
distinction between military and civiiian and George Washington said that the 
soldier and civilian were the same man. An analogy is found in the rise of the 
party system. The framers did not envisage political parties nor did ;hey 
envisage a professional military class so they provided for neither in the 


41 
o. 605 S MaCGre9 ° r BUrnS and Jack Wa1ter Pe,ta son, Government by t;-,e People , 
felbid., p. 591. 


85 


Constitution, although both are now firmly embedded in our political tradition. 

Hence the theory that civilian control is extra-constitutional has some 

credence. 

"Liberalism has always beer, the dominant ideology in the United States. 

Throughout the years the American liberal approach to military affairs has 

been hostile. They believe that 

a nation at war or in constant fear of war does not provide a very 
satisfactory milieu for the toleration and encouragement of difference 
and discussion. Concern with security matters, fear of disloyal persons, 
demand for swift action, and an atmosphere of fear are not conducive to 
free and open.debate, protection of individual liberty, and careful 
deliberation. 

These liberals have consistently pointed out that democracies have failed in 

countries with large standing armies. Isolated incidents (which will be 

discussed later) have been used to justify their fears and hostility along with 

exa-nples from Latin America, Europe, and other places. These liberals fail to 

realize that the military in the United States are dedicated supporters of 

civilian control—that this dedication is to the Constitution, and to the 

President as their Commander-in-Chief. The military have shown little interest, 

with few exceptions, in the niceties of the evolution of civilian control but 

support the civilians appointed to the military establishment by the President 

and confirmed by the Senate as their superiors without qualification. 

Former CNO (Chief of Naval Operations) Arleigh A. Burke says 

In regard to the military, there is the principle of civilian control. 
No mature U. S. military officer I know of has ever questioned it. Indeed, 


'Samuel P. Huntington, "Civilian Control and the Constitution," America n 
Political Science Review , Sep. 1956, Vol. 50, pps. 679, 698. This article gives 
an excellent analysis of the origins of civilian control. 

Samuel P. Huntington, "T he Soldier and the State, " p. T*3. "or a complete 
analysis of the effect of the liberal society versus military professionalism see 
pps. iy-162. 

4 5Haroid D. Lasswell, Natio nal Security end Individual Freedom , p. 28. 

^"These include the cases cf Generals Air.swcrth, MacArthur, Walker and Anderson. 


86 


it is a sacred part of our mi'iitary tradition itself. If a military man 
cannot reconcile his convictions with his civilian superior's order, he 
had only the recourse of leaving the service.^' 

Former Chairman of the JCS and now Supre.T.2 Coirmander of NATO Gen. Lyman 


Lemnitzer says, "The principle cf Military subordination to civilian control 

48 
is one of the most important foundations or o^r form of government." Former 

Chief of Intelligence and Research and Development of the Army Lt. Gen. Arthur 

G. Trudeau says 

I know of no military officer who questions the historically accepted ' 
principle of civilian control of the military, or the responsibility and 
authority of the Secretary of Defense and higher officials to review, for 
policy and propriety, the statements of military spokesmen. 4 " 

Civilian control of the military is not just merely accepted or endured 

by the military but it is repeatedly stressed to prospective officers from the 

time military training is started in ROTC (Reserve Officer Training Corps) units, 

in the universities, at West Point, or at other military schools. Americans 

can be proud of and reassured by the devotion to this principle of civilian 

supremacy displayed at the academies and all higher military schoojj. It is 

drilled into every officer. The military ccrsiders civilian control not only 

a necessity of the democracy which it has sworn to protect, but also a guarantee 

of its professionalism. There jxe many recent statements of both civilian 

scholars and military leaders emphasizing civilian control. I car. rind no 

military leader who has ever questioned civilian control; however, General 

Bradley appears to think that tie ilitary would prefer a less public role when 


47 
'Military Cold War Educatio.-. Report , p. 201. 

7 8 Hilitary Cold War Education Hearings, p. 6127. 

ffibid., p. 127. 

5°john W. Mas land and Laurence I. Radway, op_. cit ., p. 506. 


87 


he said, 

Economically, politically and militarily, the control of our govern- 
ment resides with the civilian executive and legislative agencies. . . 
When you have civilians like these in charge, no military clique can develop. 
And when you have trained and skilled businessmen and scientists advising 
the military as frequently as we have had since 1940, admirals and generals 
are not likely to influence u.-.duly the policy and plans of our government 
. . .1 also am sure that as soon as civilian agencies are organized to 
take over such civilian problems, the military will gladly withdraw to its 
purely professional duties. 

Except for MacArthur, not since the turn of the century, when General 

Ainsworth, with Congressional assistance, challenged the authority of Secretary 

Root, has a military man attempted to override his civilian superior.'' It is 

true that, as a result of the Congressional B-36 hearings, President Truman 

53 

dismissed Admiral Denfield. Also President Eisenhower did not reappoint General 

Ridgway after his first two years, as would have been customary, but allowed him 

to retire, supposedly from disagreement over personnel cuts in Army strength and 

the strategic role for the Army. Neither Ridgway nor Denfield ever implied that 

the decisions being made were not wholly civilian decisions. In fact, Ridgway 

said, 

When all my protests against reductions in the combat strength of 
the Army proved unavailing, there was but one course left open to me~ 
to support the course of action prescribed by ray civilian superiors, 
no matter how dangerous it seemed to me.'' 

Then General Ridgway visited all his subordinate commands and informed the 

Generals he had tried his best to forestall cuts in Army strength and that 

none of them should do or say anything that failed to support the civilian 

decision. Both Denfield and Ridgway were supported by their immediate Army 


5 General Omar H. Bradley, "Should We Fear the Military? Civilians Are 
in Charge." took , Mar. 11, 1952, p. 35. 

52samuel P. Huntington, The Common Defense, p. 311. 

53Harry S. Truman, op_. cit ., p. 53. 

5jHi11is, op_. cit ., p. W» and Sherman Adams, First Hand Report , p. 27. 

^Matthew P. Ridgway, Soldier , p. 303. 

56 Loc. cit. 


88 


and Navy civilian secretaries. After Congressmen had their say for the record, 

Denfield and Ridgway, as civilians, dropped out of the picture except as 

examples for future historians who become interested in their careers. The 

principle of civilian control was enhanced rather than challenged in these two 

cases. 

MacArthur's words, 

I find in existence a new and heretofore unknown and dangerous con- 
cept that the members of our crmed forces owe primary allegiance and 
loyalty to those who temporarily exercise the authority of the Executive 
Branch of government rather than to the country and its Constitution which 
they are sworn to defend. (Jo proposition could be more dangerous. 57 

are often used as evidence of a military challenge to civilian control. Mills 
gives this speech as his only example of military ascendancy and dangerous mili- 
tary thinking.' Few remember that MacArthur prefaced this remark by stating, 
"We of the military shall always do what we are told to do."" /\ n d several days 
later at a press conference, he elaborated by saying that "any idea that a 
military compandor in any position would possess authority over the civil func- 
tions of this government is a treasonable concept in my mind." It must be 
remembered that, when MacArthur talked before Congress, he was a civilian and, 
at the most, his revolt (if revc'it it was) was that of one soldier unsupported 
by other military men in power or on active duty. General Thomas A. Lane in 
writing about MacArthur says: 

The implication of the T.'uman supporters has been that this letter was 
written to embarrass the President. It obviously was not. This country 
once had a tradition, only recently abrogated, that Congress was entitled 
to the candid views of the country's military leaders. It was in the 
Constitutional tradition that General MacArthur had responded to an inquiry 
by the House minority leader. He had no reason to believe that his 


^Mills, op_. cit., p. 204. 

5°Loc. cit . 

•pLoc. cit . 

° u Millis, op_. cit ., p. 325. 


89 


appraisal, which was available to all inquiring Congressmen would be 
tossed into a hot political debate. He night have asked that his views 
be kept confidential; but it would have fc^en a reflection on Congressional 
prudence for him to suggest what should or should not be made public. As 
in all his advice to Congress, General MicArthur left the judgment of the 
public interest to Congress. 

You will find in this as in his other actions a meticulous observance 
by General MacArthur of his d :ty to his : jperiors. The significance of 
the MacArthur removal from cocmiand is thct the actions of a forthright and 
loyal commander were so misinterpreted by hostile allies and a coterie 
of White House toadies that the President lacked a real comprehension of 
the war being waged in Korea. 3 ' 

MacArthur was a very forceful and complicated personality. He had dealt 
successfully with considerable freedom in policy matters with Japan and felt 
himself perfectly capable of doing so. He had been Chief of Staff of the Army 
and in this capacity had many time:; forcefully represented the Army before Congress. 
He had many friends in Congress.. Ae was the Corcmander of United Nations forces 
but the chain-of-command originete.i with UN resolution (drafted by the United 
States), then sent to the United States for execution. The UN resolution would 
be considered by the NSC, approved by the President, and sent to the JCS who 
sent it to the Array as the executive agent. General Collins, a man much junior 
to General MacArthur would transmit the orders to General MacArthur. To the Army, 
with few exceptions, MacArthur had been disobedient to a superior officer, and 
obedience is the highest military virtue. General Lane's explanation maybe plausi- 
ble to some but testimony before Congress is a regularized method with a Committee 
requesting information and not by personal correspondence. All four members of the 
JCS testified strongly against l.im. Some of his immediate subordinates and a few 
who had been on his staff tried to justify his actions. No one doubted President 
Truman's authority, but there w<is considerable emotional opinion among the 
military, particularly retired officers, that a great commander had been treated 


6l Maj. Gen. Thomas A. Lane, "MacArthur Misjudged," Array , June 1965, 
pps. 6, 8. 


90 


shabbily. No doubt President Truman could hava relieved the General in a more 
generous manner. Since then MacArthur's cause has been adopted by "rightist" 
groups, including a few senior retired military officers. This list includes 
General Bonner Fellers, General James A. Van Fleet, General Albert C. Wedemeyer, 
General Mark Clark, General George E. Stratemeyer, Admiral Sen Moreel, Admiral 
Chester Ward. A distinguishing characteristic of all these officers, represent- 
ing all three services, is that they fought in the Pacific, mostly in Korea. 

There have been other cases or momentary importance, the most recent of 
which is that of General Edwin Walker who said that "the oath of an Army officer 
was a convenant with Almighty Gcd.' ^ It is true that the oath of office, as 
both MacArthur and Walker state it, is to support the Constitution but an officer's 
commission from the President charges an officer to obey his military as well as 
civilian superiors. But this is quibbling about words. 

But Walker before a Senate subcommittee after his retirement, said, "I 
want to say first that, like all officers of the Armed Services known to me, I 

have always respected and supported the principle of civilian control over the 

6h 
military. ... Civilian authority is supreme." Walker was a minor figure, an 

embarrassment to the Army, and his case would never have received the publicity 

it did except that it was exploited by Congress and the "Anti -Communists" and 

"rightest" groups. 

Admiral Burke said he had never heard of an officer advocating preventive 
war. ' The admiral was mistaken and it concerned a case of disobedience involving 
national policy. 

Preventive war, which was strictly against national policy, wa^ advocated 


62 
Hew York Times, January ]k, 1962, p» 1. 

°3Tristram Coffin, Passion of the Hawks , p. 102. 

"^Senate Military Cold War Education Hearings, p. 1390. 

°%enate Military Cold War Hearings, p. 1 74. 


91 


by Secretary of the Navy Francis Matthews and also by General Orvil Anderson, 
Commandant of the Air War College, in August and September (respectively) of 
1950. No one should object to a senior military school theoretically considering 
the possibility of preventive war, particularly at this time, because in 1950 
the United States superiority in nuclear warfa.-e was unquestioned and time was 
considered in favor of the U.S.S.R., But for such a policy to be publicly 
advocated by people in authority could have had the most serious effects on 
foreign policy and, more to the Joint, the military was openly advocating a 
solution to a political question— end this is not the prerogative of the military. 
It would seem that the most serious mistake wa-. made by Secretary Matthews who, 
as a member of the NSC, should have known prec'sely what the national policy was, 
while General Anderson, as the h;ac of a school, Might be excused on the basis 
that his job required him to des with all possible theoretical questions 
connected with war and peace. General Anderson was dismissed but Secretary 
Matthews was only privately censured by President Truman, who felt that, due to 
inexperience, Matthews had not fully realized .he impact of his remarks and 
he had been listening too much to ;■ :vy admirals. As Admiral Burke says the 
possibility, advantages, and disadvantages, of preventive war, in strategic plans 
are discussed. ' Admiral Robert B, ;arney, Chief of Naval Operations, made 
some very restrained remarks in ; 1954 speech, but no evidence has been produced 
that indicates the military ever reduced such a recommendation to writing even 
for discussion purposes. 

There is no doubt that the military accepts civilian control when it comes 
from the Commander-in-Chief, but William J. Coughlin, in Missiles and Rockets . 


Truman, op. cit., p. 383-and Bernard Brodie, Strat egy in the Missile Aoe, 

P. 229. =*-' 

iLoc. cit. 


°°Brodie, op. cit ., p. 229. 


92 


expresses doubt about acceptance of the same control from Secretary HcNamara who, 

more than any other Secretary of Defense, has taken command of and done much to 

unify the services. He says 

It should be understood that the high officers in the Pentagon, with- 
out exception, acknowledged the need of civilian control of the; military 
establishment. But in most cases it was felt that this civilian authority 
rested across the Potomac, on Capitol Hi 51 and in the White House, and 
most certainly was not required to make its presence felt in the halls 
of the Pentagon itself. The actual running of the military establishment, 
it was agreed, most properly belonged in the hands of the military. 

Recently the top military men he v.: not spoken out, except in Congressional tes- 
timony, but there is increasing „ ;dence that junior officers of field grade 
think there is too much civilian control at the Pentagon level. Colonel Robert 
H. Ginsburgh advances the theory that civilians have not only taken over control 
to the point of invading the mi'.itory man's traditional province and that 
military professionalism is endangered by civilians taking over military strategy, 
but that science and industry are preempting weapons requirements end that 
several layers of civilian appointees are isolating and downgrading military 
opinion.' Colonel Francis X. Kane, in another article, claims thr.t the present 
civilian control of the military has "computerized" military decisions, removing 
human considerations from military problems which have been the military's 
traditional area of expertise. These two officers are supported by many 
civilian experts, and recently Admiral Willia.1 J. McNeil, a World War II Reserve 
Naval Admiral, who was the civilian comptrollor of the Defense Department from 
1949 to 1959, said, 

The present tendency to increasing!.' greater civilian control, over 
both defense planning and execution, rau;i be tempered by an increasingly 


69 Williara J. Coughlin, "The Revolution, Part II," Missiles and Rockets , 
April 6, 1964, p. 54. 

'"Colonel Robert H. Ginsburgh, "The Challenge to Military Professionalism," 
Air Force and Space Digest , March, 1964, pps. 50-56. 

7'Colonel Francis X. Kane, "Security is Too Important to be Left to Com- 
puters," Fortune, April, 1964, pps. 146-147. 


93 


skilled and competent Offic..-- Corps. . .there seems to be a dangerous 
tendency in our defense to try to anticipate what is wanted from the top 
(referring to civilian heads) and then supply it.' 2 

tot all junior officers agree. Major John W. Seigle has written an article 

entitled "The Myth of Decision by Computer." He claims that the civilians have 

instituted what the military can use to its acVantage. He says, "The idea 

that diabolic computers are making defense decisions is misleading. The proper 

concern is whether the right people are operating the machines! ' i The fact 

that General Taylor has said, 

On the one side there are those who stress the dangers of excessive 
military influence in the development of national policy. . .the other 
side of the debate holds. , .that there is presently over-control of the 
military which is causing cr may causa ar erosion of military authority 
and prestige,_gnd the subxerg-nce of military professionalism to civilian 
dilettantism.' 

indicates that the highest ranking officer in the country recognizes a problem. 

Does the fact that junior officers of today, who will be senior officers of 

tomorrow, are restless under tic,ht civilian control at the Pentagon level now 

make it possible that this influence will increase and spread so as to endanger 

civilian control? Evidence does not corroborate this conclusion, particularly 

because the officers publicly complaining of excessive civilian control are 

Air Force officers concerned with the replacement of manned bombers with 

missiles, while the Army, whose mission of limited warfare has increased in 

importance under McNamara, is not complaining. The underlying dissatisfaction 

appears to be service-or mission-oriented, rather than oriented toward civilian 

control . 


^ Daniel S. Henkin, "The Speech That Wasn't Cleared," Army-Navy-Air Force 
Journal and Register, June 20, \s6k, pps. 1 and 8. 

/^Major John W. Seigle, "The Myth of Decision by Computer," Army, May, \Sdk, 

P. 6 7. 

/''Taylor, o£. cit., p. 8. 


94 


There is a much more subtle military influence which must be considered. 

Walter Lippmannhas said that the talkativeness of American military men is an 

international scandal which has caused loss of respect and confidence toward 

the United States. 7 ^ Finer says that the American system of goverrcr.cnt and the 

enhanced role of the military force* military men into a spotlight of constant 

publicity. Further, 

In this (the military) is neither better nor worse off than any 
other government agency in Jni' ad SUtes. The generals and admirals 
are accused of 'speaking out of turn 1 , and of uttering sentiments which 
are bigoted, or contrary to official policy, or which deal with matters- 
like foreign policy— which ara no conce.-r of theirs. They certainly do 
do these things. Often, the publicity 3-; /en to their view is not intended 
by them. . .Yet in all tha;c cases it is not only not censured by the 
American public but is positively defended on the grounds that 'the public 
have a right to know'. It mu t never be forgotten that the American 
panacea for any policy protle.71 is publicity. In this respect the militai^ 
are no more open-mouthed or undisciplined than the civil administrators. 

In this connection Hills points out that the military aims are legitimate 
and that military men are most competent to pi rsue them, but he finds because 
of the new military prestige, what the military says tends weight to controversial 
matters which are mainly political and raises military matters above the political. 
He also says that military men ; re expert in : orking behind the scenes to accom- 
plish their purposes. 77 It is well known that Eisenhower was irritated many times 

78 
by speeches which seemed in conflict with administration policy, and Secretary 

McNamara found it necessary to -issue the following directive: "After the 

President has taken a position, has established a policy, I expect no member of 

the Department, either civilian or military, will discuss that policy other than 

in a way to support it before the public."' . ecretary McNarnara refused to give 

names or incidents regarding civilians or rail tary which had made the directive 


?John M. Swomley, Jr., Th ; _i ilitary Establishment , p. 113. 

3 Finer, op. cit ., p. 142. 

'l-lills, op_. cit., pps. 185, 199, 202. 

■'Swomley, op . cit ., p. 113. 

^Coruj. Rec ., op_. cit ., p. 14439. 


75 JU 
76 Fl - 

7°S' 
79c 


95 


necessary and said: 

The only case I can recall involving discipline of any kind relating 
to a public statement by an officer or a civilian employee of the Department 
of any kind including statements relating to Communism is the discipline 
applied to General Walker. The infractions certainly were not major ones.°° 

The military leaders are popular speakers at all types of meetings and they 

naturally try to say something cf .mportance. Such a normal instinct is hard to 

control, particularly when the public and press seem to approve. And it 1s not 

true to say that this "talkativeness" is usually not without a purpose. There 

is no more ambitious group of men than the military. They are power hungry, too. 

3ut their ambition and longing for power is directed in one of two directions: 

toward the enhancement of their particular service or toward the increase of their 

prestige within their own service* Mo military man ever talks against civilian 

control, although his talks are exploited by the press and partisan advocates 

for every possible anti-administration recommendation. or for controversial 

material. 

In reviewing the speeches of military leaders, one finds General Power 

advocating an air alert, General Ridgway mere ground troops, General LeMay more 

airplanes. While patriotism ar.; the n^3d to protect our democracy are woven 

into the speeches, the emphasis is on the military needs of their own service. 

This orientation of military men toward power and prestige for their own 

service is undoubtedly one of the jest safeguards against militarism which a 

democratic government has. The Air Force espouses massive retaliation because 

the Air Force would have the top defense taskj the Army espouses limited warfare 

for the same reason; the Navy argues for atomic submarines to take over strategic 

nuclear missions while the Air Force opposes them. A victory for one service is 

a defeat for the other. 


Senate Cold War Education K^arings , p. 139**. 


96 


It is the same way with the budget. Strategic goals are converted into 
military appropriations in which e ch service is dedicated to getting its 
share, or more, from the budget. If the military ever agreed on strategic 
goals, the equipment to attain the e gccls, or the size and proportionate share 
of military appropriations, then the danger of militarism would be greatly 
increased. The present system is ^pensive, and produces pluralism, but as 
Senator Henry Jackson (D.-Wash.) SQys, "The life and death issues of National 
Security are too important to sacrifice a healthy competition in the name of effi- 
ciency." 

General Bradley when asked to comment on what would happen to the United 
States if the Communists took ova.- Europe and Asia, said, "We'd have to mili- 
tarize completely for 100 or 15C years, and that would be as bad ss defeat." 32 
In other words, General Bradley thinks that militarism would be as bad for this 
country as would Communism. It is doubtful if many civilians see the dangers 
of militarism as clearly as do the military men themselves—they are experts by 
training and schooling on the effects produced by militarism in other countries 
and have both intellectually and emotionally rejected it for the United States. 
That love of country and patriotism are motivating forces in young officers 
cannot be denied. The letters of Captain J. P. Spruill to his wife, published 
after his untimely death, are classics in this regard. J Additional evidence 
is supplied by another young officer who asserts that the public does not 
fully understand the military profession and says: 


Si'Too Much Unifying Can be Costly Senator Jackson Tells Career Men," 
Amy-Navy-Air Force Journal and Register , June 20, 1964, p. 8. 
°^Alf red Vogts, A History of Militarism , p. 486. 
83 Army Information Digest , July, 1964, pps. 46-47. 


97 


Today the armed services ^re rapidly assuming a role in American 
society which leaves them virtually the scie repository of those virtues 
upon which the American Reptbl:c was founded: devotion to pub'Kc service, 
high moral standards, selfless obedience e.id sacrifice to the ideal of 
service to the nation, and cth-.r virtues fast fading from the world 
scene. 

Military teaching and a military csi-eir are still producing young msn who 

recognize values of liberty and justice and art willing and anxious to 

pattern their military careers in this tradition. Undoubtedly the two examples 

shown above are rather extreme symptoms of selfless, patriotic idealism and 

there is a danger connected with such absolutist. For military men to believe 

that they are the sole repositories of American virtues shows a lack of 

understanding of our other great democratic institutions— educational, political, 

and spiritual. Such extremism ir youth can be accepted as immature judgment 

but, if extended to senior military officers, v.ould be dangerous and would 

be an evidence of extreme mil its. . 

S. L. A. Marshall, in a recent article entitled "Why Do They Slander Our 

Military Men?" said, 

The American military, like all the rest of us, want a better deal 
for themselves if it can be got. But I maintain that they are beyond 
the rest of us in their active, thinking support of the time-tinted ideals 
that have kept this a goverrme.it of, by and for the people. Here I speak 
of the principle of civiliar. cjntrcl in its broadest, most mear. ngful 
implication. The principle has stayed firm through almost two centuries, 
because the American military have given it wholehearted support. Had 
they not been so dedicated, co stitutions':ity might have run as devious 
course in the U. S. as in a ba .ana republic. In our union, the military 
alone have had the power to ch 5 1 er.ge Gove rnment decisively— and they 
have served but to uphold Government. 8 ' 


84 

""Major Carl M. Guel zo, "In Defense of an Elusive Ideal," Army , July, 1964, 

p. 64. 

°$S. L. A. Marshall, "Why Do They Slander Our Military Men?", Post, 

September 5, 1964. 


98 


Former Secretary of Defense Robert A, Lovett said: 

Alarmist cries about the lack of civilian control over the military, 
in our Nation, deal with a str=>uwan issue,. They are concerned with a 
problem that does not really exist, and they are divisive and damaging 
by falsely implying that the military does not accept our historic 
tradition of civilian supremacy. Nothing could be more wrong. 

Former Secretary of Defense Thomas S. Gates expressed the same idea in this 

manners 

Civilian control, in a historic sense, is not debatable. 1 have never 
heard it questioned. Military men respect it and believe it. . . .No mill- • 
tary man nor military group ..'..> its poiiticjl control. I have no fear what- 
soever in this regard. 'The man on the wl ite horse' is no more real than 
Don Quixote tilting at wind /cry foolish worry of some ex- 

tremists. This will not ant c nnot ...er our system and it would 

never be accepted by responsible officers. ^7 

Dr. James D. Atkinson, associate professor of government at Georgetown Uni- 
versity, was asked by the Subcommittee for a statement. He made a statement and 
it is interesting to note that he pointed out that Andrew Jackson, '/infield 
Scott, George B. McClelland, and Leonard Wood, although soldiers, brought polit- 
ical issues before the public and that this was accepted as natural by the 
people of the United States. 00 In feet, it wasn't until the 1920's that the 
military were supposed to be exel Jded from politics. The important point is 
that not one of these generals who ciscussed political issues before the public 
and even ran for office attempted to enhance their political position by military 
support. Atkinson's conclusion is that the military should be nonpartisan, and 
it closely follows that of other rej itable scholars of the military tradition. 

No myth has been more persistent—especially since the 192G's--than 
that there existed a military mind which w:s alien to American soil and 
which had to be watched carefully lest it i ,-jderraine our national insti- 
tutions. The myth that somehow an officer caste night arise and create 
a dictatorship has never had any foundatio. in fact in the United States, 


Senate Cold War Education Hearings , p. 12. 
°7ibid„ p. 3ii8. 
0o Senate Military Cold War Education Hearings , pps. 31^7-3160. 


99 


yet it has somehow managed to persist. The myth has been nourished on 
the idea that there has been a conflict between the military and the 
civil authorities over the question of 'civilian supremacy' over the 
military. Actually, this is a false dichotomy. Even a cursory survey 
of American military history reveals the fact civilian supremacy—even 
during the darkest days of the Civil War--had never been questioned by 
military people. 9 

With evidence from two Secretaries of Defense (one Republican and one 
Democrat) and with opinions of prominent scholars' to corroborate such 
views, there seems little room for argument with Senator Thurmond's conclusion 
before the Senate Subcommittee: "The information developed by the subcommittee 
shows conclusively that there is no threat from the military to civilian suprem- 
acy." 91 


j^Ibid., p. 31<*7. 

7 Gene M. Lyons, "The Mew Civil Military Relations," American Political 
Science Review , March 1961, pps. 53-55 says that the military accept civilian 
supremacy and that they have been thrown into a political role in formation 
of policy. Lewis J. Edinger, "Military Leaders and Foreign Policy Making," 
American Political Science Revie w, June I9<>3, p. ^05 says "In the study of 
'civil -military relations' the effect of military influence have been difficult 
to assess.- After reading all the factors required to determine military 
influence—it can be practically said that no one has produced studies that 
would confirm military influence." Paul Y. Hcmroond, Organization for Defense : 
The American Military Establi sh- v; : in the 20th Century comes to the conclusion 
that any risk of losing civiliar control is considerably less than is commonly 
believed. William T. R. Fox, "Civilian Soldiers and American Military Policy," 
World Politics , April 1955, pps, ^03-418 presents a stronger argument for military 
inclusion and actions in civil-fi;ilitary relations. 

* 'Senate Military Cold War Education Report , p. 203. 


100 


Military Mind 

H. G. Wells once said, "The professional military mind is by necessity an 
inferior and unimaginative mind; no man of high intellectual quality would 
willingly imprison his gifts in such a calling. '& 2 The concept of a military mind 
that lacks balance of judgment, uses dictatorial methods instead of persuasion, 
looks at problems narrowly and illiberally, and by education, training and 
experience is not equipped to perform a role in society outside of a constricted 
military sphere, stems from the liberal tradition in the United States from 
1920 to 1940. 93 

Several political scientists have observed that our present pluralistic 
society has become so mixed that there is no longer a clearly defined military 
group in contradistinction to a civilian group. Gene M. Lyons is not the first 
or only one to express the idea that civilians are becoming militarized and 
the military civilianized. 94 Just exactly what is meant by this statement is 
not amplified but the impression given from the entire article is that senior 
officers today show a broader interpretation and knowledge of political, economic, 
psychological, and sociological factors while the civilian knowledge and use 
of the same factors is becoming narrower. 

John './. Masland and Laurence I. Radway portray the military today as follows: 

The traditional distinction between military and civilian affairs in 
American life has become less significant. Under present conditions at home 
and abroad, it is obviously not enough for the armed forces to provide good 
soldiers, sailors, airmen, and the leaders necessary to command them in 
battle. Today many of these leaders are called upon to work closely with 


9 2 Lt. Col. Gordon K. Fleishman, "The Myth of the Military Mind," Military 
Revi ew , November 19°^, p. k. 

93See Chapter 1, page 4, footnote 7 and speech of Senator Ful bright, Cong. 
Rec , 1st Sess. (1961) Vol. 107 ; , Part 1, p. 1^33. 

S^Gene M. Lyons, "The New Civil-Military Relations," American Political Science 
Review, March 1961, pp. 53-55; see also "Washington Play It Cool," .Newsweek , 
January 8, 1964, p. 3k, and footnote 31 on page 79. 


101 


foreign affairs experts, industrial managers, scientists, labor leaders 
and educators. They participate in the drafting and promotion of 
legislation, in the preparation of a national budget, and in the^ 
determination of the American position on a wide variety of foreign policy 
issues. They are required to understand, to communicate with, and to 
evaluate the judgment of political leaders, officials of other executive 
agencies, and countless specialists; they must make sound judgments 
themselves on matters which affect a wide variety of civilian concerns. 
They are called upon to evaluate the motivations and capabilities of foreign 
nations and to estimate the effects of American action or inaction upon 
these nations. And above all, the new role of military leaders requires j r 
of them a heightened awareness of the principles of our democratic society. 

C. P. Snow has divided the intellectuals into two classes, scientific and 

humanistic. He claims that each has its separate dialogue and one of the dangers 

of the present era is that they do not understand each other. 9 It could be said 

that each discipline has its own methods and individualistic mental views. 

Similarly business, law, niedicine, profession;! athletics, have general charac— - 

teristics which could be classi. 'led as separate mentalities. General George H. 

Decker said, "The real test of the military decision maker is to weed out the 

trivia, to go to the heart of the matter, to decide, and having decided to 

execute."^ General Taylor, giving mere detail, agrees that there is a military 

mind and described it in a speech before the rtnerican Bar Association as follows: 

Personally, I've never baen overly exercised by the chares of possessing 
a military mind. How would you lawyers feel if you were said not to possess 
a legal mind? 3y the same token we soldiers, sailors/ and airmen regard a 
military mind as something to be sought nd developed— an indispensable 
professional asset which con only be acquired after years of training in 
reflecting and acting on mill :ary and related problems. We hope that such 
a mind, when properly matured, will prova itself analytical, accurate and 
decisive in time of crisis because history has shown that neither the battle- 
field nor the national coyncil table is the place for conjecture, vagueness, 
or obscurity of thought." 


55|/.as1and and Radway, 0£. cit ., p. vii. 

9 C„ P. Snow, The Two Cultures and A Second Look , pp. 11-12. 

97= 


9 AFleishman, cjd«, cit., p. 7. 
y Taylor, op_. cit. , p. 8. 


102 


The influx of retired officers into positions of responsibility in industry 
and government has already been noted. Obviously their performance is creditable 
or industry would not accept them neither would the President appoint them nor 
would Congress approve. It is also important that 200 generals or admirals 
(17 percent), 1400 colonels or Naval captains (11 percent), and 6,000 officers of 

lower grades are on assignment to interservice or international agencies or to 

99 

other departments of the government. 

To meet these increased challenges the military establishment is increasingly 
placing emphasis on education both in service schools and civilian institutions. 
Take the 1964 Army figures as an example (the same approximate percentages are 
true for the Navy and Air Force). More than 73% hold college degrees, a gain of 
24% since 195^, and 8% hold master's degrees excluding medicine, law and theology. 
When the last of the World War II officers, \i\~o became officers after serving 
in enlisted status, are retired, these percentages will rise considerably. Post 
graduates degrees originally were .'.llowed only for disciplines which could show 
an immediate military use or need but now officers ara allowed to take advanced 
degrees in almost any field but th3 biggest gains are in biological and physical 
science, management, economics, psychology, and political science with emphasis 
on international relations. At present there are 800 Army officers enrolled 
at government expense in full-time graduate study and an additional 7,000 in 
off-duty study of their own, many of them for graduate degrees. During the past 
10 years, 4,500 have received Master's and Doctor's degrees. 

Masland and Radway, who have produced a recent and comprehensive study on 
military education, point out that the following subjects are among those taught 
at the various branch schools: public and international affairs, community 


99 
.QQMasland and Radway, op . oit., p. 517. 

"Officers Achieve Impressive Gains in Degrees Held," ANF Army News Features , 

November 16, 1964, p. 1. 


103 


relations, military government, civil disturbances, Congressional relations, 
general management, foreign military aid program, public speaking, conference 
and committee techniques, and a course dealing with Communism, fascism, and 
democracy (each school teaches these subjects in different proportion and no 
school teaches all of the above subjects). 

At the National War College three quarters of the time is spent on non-military 

102 
subjects dealing with international relations. The authors felt too much 

time was spent on the foundations of Communism (Marxism and Leninism) and thought 

103 
more time should be spent on the emerging nations of Asia and Africa. This 

college's entire curriculum is directed toward preparing officers for assignments 

10^ 
to positions involving the formulation of security policy at the NSC level. 

At the Army, Navy, and Air Force War College the authors were impressed by the 
breadth of the curriculum. "At no other place can an individual secure in- 
struction on the full range of circumstances that bear upon the security of the 
United States today and during the foreseeable future. "'°' 

The conclusion of the authors on professional military education is as 
follows: 

It is a record of which the armed forces justly may be proud; it is 
far better than many civilian educators and laymen realize. The services 
recognize the need to prepare officers for the newer demands that have been 
placed upon them. The awareness has led to both specialized training 
programs and broader educational opportunities. ... 

Ue conclude that military education does make a very substantial con- 
tribution to the preparation of officers for policy roles. . . .The range 
of subjects presented in military schools helps him to see the relevance of 
his task to the larger context in which he operates. It helps him to see 
broader technical, organizational and social relationships, and to appreciate 
the dynamic quality of decision making in an era of revolutionary change. 
In many cases the educational experience helps him to diminish a narrow 


JplKasland and Radway, op. cit., pps. 273, 279, 291. 

°glbid„ p. 358. 

"fold,., p. 359. 

gfoid., P. 368. 
105 Ibid„ p. 367. 


\<A 


parochialism and to increase versatility. They facilitate creative 
military service under civilian leadership in a democratic society. 100 

The most important factor concerning West Point, Annapolis, and the 
Air Academy was that the amount of instruction provided was much closer to the 
amount provided by civilian colleges than was expected. This was accomplished 
because the total education program is unusually long. No academy offers less 
work in the humanities, composition, and speech than is required at a civilian 
college. Social sciences have inc.-eased in importance with a diplor.iatic history 
course devoted to a systematic analysis of international relations. The cadets 
spend more time in arts and sciences than on either engineering or military 
subjects. 107 

Over 65% of regular Army officers come from ROTC, the Navy has a lesser 

percentage and the Air Force approximately the same. In 1965 there were 

13,000 Second Lieutenants commissioned in the Army alone (goal is 17,000) 

with only 500 from West Point, a ratio of 26 to 1. By weight of numbers 

alone, the military graduates of civilian institutions are becoming more 

influential in the policies and actions of our military establishment every day. 

Gene H. Lyons' and John W. Masl.:nd's Educatio . and Military Leadership is the 

most recent and authoritative study of the ROTC. Among their conclusions are 

that: 

The programs were originally designed for the preparation of reserve 
officers available to lead a citizen army and navy mobilized in an 
emergency. . . Present trends suggest a diminishing role for reserve officers. , 
and a rising demand in the career service for officers trained in colleges 
and universities.' " 


10o Ibid., pps. 502, 503. 

10 7JFid., pps. 214-217. 

1o8 Newsletter Issue No. 2, U. S. Army Trcop Support Unit , August 20, 1963 

p. 2. 

'°9Gene H. Lyons and John W. Masland, Ed-ication and Military leadership : A 
Study of ROTC , p. 3. 


105 


These men (ROTC graduates) must understand the role of the military 
establishment in a democratic society and be sensitive to political, 
economic, and social developments at home and abroad. They must have 
analytical skill and good judgment of high order. Perhaps of greatest 
importance is the need for wisdom and a broad perspective, not only among 
officers who advance to hither levels of responsibility but among officers 
at all levels, in peacetime, and war."" 

Quantitatively ROTC oi/tp it looks all right. . . .Qualitatively the 
situation is different. The UOTC programs are not contributing adequately 
to the strong professional officer base required for the forces-in-being. 
Almost all of the testimony that we have obtained has confirmed that the 
ROTC product makes excellent officer material. But too few of these men 
elect to remain in the military. The services are not securing their share. 
of talent for long-term and career duty, particularly in certain specialized 
categories. ' 

Responsibility for achieving a proper relationship of higher education 
to the needs of society rests with individuals and agencies of the federal 
government and with leaders in higher education. 1 '2 

Civilian institutions and the services must realize that this group of 
young Americans has an important job to do and that how well it performs and 
how well the future military officer is imbued with democratic principles may 
be determined at our educational institutions* One conclusion is evident: that the 
type of officer desired will not evolve if civilian institutions and the services 
fail to recognize that this is an croa for which they have a responsibility to 
provide the necessary background and instruction and that not just any curriculum 
is satisfactory. 

If an American military mir.d was at one time narrow and parochial, the 
evidence available now is that by education, training, and experience it has 
grown with its expanded responsibilities in science, technology, and political 
and economic affairs. In fact, "the far-flung operations of military officers 
at mid-century may be viewed by the future historian as the start of a fundamental 


11 Ibid„ p. 13. 
Hl lbid. , p. 212. 
112 Ibid„ p. 237. 


106 


111 
change in the American social order and the future American system. 11 

Although there are no statistics available, retired military personnel 

as well as the more than 50% of American men who have some kind of military 

service, do not seem to be having difficulty in being assimilated into civilian 

communities. Officers now are Republicans as well as Democrat; Methodists, 

Catholics, and every other religious denomination; members of Rotary, Lions, 

K.iwanis; and active in PTA and other public-minded groups. "Much of the isolation 

and austerity that characterized the military forces was pressed upon them by an 

' 14 
indifferent or suspicious people"' but now they represent a cross-section of 

America as broad as any other group. Martin 3!unenson says: 

World V/ar II was a watershed in the relations between the American 
public and the military servi ces. Since that time, the American people 
have come to understand ttu precarious equilibrium of our world and the 
necessity for maintaining I arge Militi.'y Establishment. Officers are 
no longer outside the mainstream of American life, but perform a vital 
function of protecting and conserving it. They are now recognized as 
professionals in the full sense of the term, not only as the opposite of 
amateurs, but achieving a knowledge acquired by study and experience. "5 

Public Education by the Military 

As has been indicated earlier, Senator Fulbright in a Senate speech took 
exception to the military engaging in public education on the dangers of Communism. 
He said that the military does not have this ability nor should it have this 
responsibility. And, of course, this public instruction was just cnother evidence 
of the spreading influence of the military into every phase of American life. 
If the military could move into one sphere of political education of the public, 
it could certainly extend its inflcance into other areas of education. It was 
further evidence of Eisenhower's contention tliat the military portion of the 
complex was, by its very size, taking over vital areas in American culture that 


JJ^Masland an j Radway, Ibid. , p. 25. 
m lbid. , p. k. 

115Martin Blumenson "Some Thoughts On Professionalism," Military Review , 
September 1964, p. 13. 


107 


had never before been subjected to military direction. Fulbright's speech 
resulted in a Senate Subcommittee being appointed which the press called the 
investigation into the "muzzling of the military." The subcommittee report was 
almost a complete repudiation of Fulbright's thesis and, as this report, which 
has been quoted several times already, is the most exhaustive study by a Senate 
Subcommittee of the proliferation or penetration of the military into extra- 
military fields, in this case education of the public, it will be considered in 
some detail, even though its consideration may repeat other parts of this 
study. It recommended that the military participation in anti -Communist 
seminars be continued because the experience snd specialized knowledge of the 
military gave it a legitimate function, due to the dangers and menace of 
Communism. Two Senators dissent ;d to this conclusion. Senator Sirom Thurmond 
went considerably further and reconmended that "the Military Establishment should 

continue to utilize its personnel and facilities to the maximum extent to inform 

"117 
the public on the issues of the cold war."' Senator E. L. Bartlett said, "I 

continue to be, and likely always will be opposed to public education by the 

military on the subject of communism." His reason was that the officers did not 

* f Q 

have time, with all their other duties. The concurring members of the 
Committee consisted of Democrat:;, John Stennis, Mississippi, Stuart Symington, 
Missouri, Henry Jackson, Washington and Republicans Leverett Sultonstall, Massa- 
chusetts, Francis Case, South Dakota, and Margaret Chase Smith, Maine. George 
W, Brown, in his study of the findings of the Committee, considered them 
"reasonably representative of feelings of the attitudes in the Senate as a wholei'"? 
This assessment seems accurate. 


'^Military Cold War Education Report , pps. 7, 8. 
! JiLpc. cit., p. 191. 
1lSt°£« Sll" PP S « **3, V*. 


George W, Brown, Generals and the Public; Recent Policymaking in Civil- 
Military Relations , p. 4. 


108 


Judging from the parade of witnesses supporting military participation 
in cold war seminars to educate thj public on the menace of Communism, there 
could be little doubt as to the conclusion the Subcommittee would roach. 
Witnesses were politically bipartisan. They included the military and civilian 
heads under both Democratic and Republican Administrations, a professor of 
government from Georgetown University, other government officials, and many of 
the officers who had participated in or conducted cold war seminars. However, 

there was some evidence submitted in dissent particularly by Norman Thomas and 

1 20 
the Socialist Party-Social Democratic Federation and the Jewish War Veterans. 

There was also Senator Fulbright's speech in t.ie Senate, containing his 

memorandum to the Secretary of Defense and other evidence he had placed in the 

1 ot 

Congressional Record which was r.-ado a part of the hearings. The preponderance 
of witnesses came from the military, many of i . 10m were retired, or were civilians 
who had held top positions in the Defense Department or, in some cases, the State 
Department. The absence of educators as witnesses, in a matter in which they 
should have priority interest, was very apparent. These hearings wore well 
reported. It is admitted that the impact of the hearings could not be evaluated 
at the time but, as students study them their impact will probably become greater. 
Any educator desiring to make a written statement or to present testimony could 
have done so, as Norman Thomas did but none took the opportunity. Senator Ful- 
bright's speech and memorandum iii-iated the investigation; yet he didn't appear 
at the investigation or comment about it while it was in session, .as he 
satisfied that the subject was bsing covered :Vom all angles? Or did he feel, 
for political reasons, that he should not inte.-vene? Or was he just too busy? 
No one knows, but his opinion would have been valuable in assessing the objectiv- 
ity of the investigation. 


IZOSenate Cold War Education Hearings, p. 3016 and 3142«43, 
121 loc. cit ., p. 3053. 


109 


The subcommittee presented much valuable material and undoubtedly brought 
several subjects, general ly misunderstood by the public, into focus. It was 
universally recognized that military men have a responsibility to indoctrinate 
the members of the armed forces on the military aspects of Communism and ,-. 
subversion by Communists within the military establishment. There was no 
argument by anyone that the U.S..S.:!. represents the only threat to the security 
of the United States. There war. no doubt that Communist subversive activities 
within the United States are antithetical to the government of the United 
States and that knowledge of these subversive activities should be available to 
every American. It was recognised that the subject of Communism, in any of 
its various aspects, is a politica'. question end it was also recognized that 
the military should not appear in the same seminar with controversial speakers 
such as those of the various "rightist" groups, or retired officers who have 
become politically aligned. 

President Eisenhower's statement at the hearings is typical of those who 

testified: 

I am sure that all of us would deplore any move which would restrict 
public access to reliable information on the deadliness, implacability, 
totality, and cunning of the Communist assault on freedom. We should not 
trouble ourselves over the possibility of overinforming the public.' 22 

And later on he qualified this statement with regard to the military: "Military 
involvement in the providing of information concerning Communist potential aggres- 
sion—indeed its involvement in all matters—must be clearly nonpartisan, directed 
to subjects related to the defense of America, and in harmony with approved 
national policies. "' 2 3 

The subcommittee report stated that military participation must be factual 
and non-partisan. As far as Communism is concerned, it is my opinion that these 


1 22 

Loc. cit ., p. 5. 
123lqc. cit., p. 178. 


no 


two conditions are impossible. An illustration will suffice to demonstrate this. 

President Eisenhower says that it is not the function of the military services 

to ferret out the details of attempted Communist subversion in our nation. This 

is the job of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, but the long professional 

experience with Communist tactics and with Coir.nunism's highly developed 

educational system makes the military singularly well trained to provide the 

public and members of the Armed Forces with the implications of the extreme 

threat of Communist imperialism, in other words President Eisenhower would 

allow the military to choose the facts to be presented and to put them into 

proper context for presentation* The military is capable of performing this job, 

and the job needs to be done. But in the case of Communism, either as an external 

or an internal threat, identica'. facts will bring disagreement in interpretation. 

To quote from Newsweek : 

The FBI is charged with laving developed 'a vested interest in security 1 
--to the point where it ha:, bsen exaggerrting the internal threat posed by 
a steadily weakening Communist Party. S;;ys one congressman: 'They are, in 
effect, shoring up the Comnunist Party, making it appear much more of a^ 
menace than it can possibly b.; considering its decline. This is a gimmick 
that helps the agency score with Congress. Hoover scares hel i out of a lot 
of Congressmen. How can they refuse to go along on his appropriation when 
he is in the forefront in the fight to oust Commies and spies?' 1 " 

Stewart Alsop says: 

Finally, the change proves that American policy has worked remarkably 
well. . . .Only a few year:: tgo the 'iron curtain 1 was indeed impenetrable 
and the 'satellites' were satellites indeed. Now those long-familiar words 
are outmoded—the iron curtain is full of great, gaping holes., and the 
satellites are very visibl ■■ tiginning to shake loose. In short, the con- 
tainment policy has succeeded. 


1 2Jt Hewr.y;eek, December 7, V)i>k, p. 23. 


Ill 


If the West can only hang together, if there is no disaster in Asia, 
if the conditions which mace the policy work are not foolishly or complacently 
altered, the policy will continue to succeed, as the memory of Stalin's 
terror fades, and the Soviet system changes at an accelerated pace.' 2 5 

Whether Newsweek or A1sop are right, wrong, or partially right is not the ques- 
tion and is not the subject of this work. The question is, would David 
Lawrence, Walter Lippmann, Walter Judd, Barry Goldwater, Strom Thurmond, or 
William Fulbright derive the same interpretation from the same set of facts on 
Communism? They are all intelligent and respected Americans but they would 
produce different answers. For the military to be, in any way, drawn into 
such an argument brings it not only into the political arena, which is re- 
cognized, but places it in a position of using facts which, regardless of how 
they are used, would result in a partisan position. Practically everyone who 
testified before the subcommittee said the military must be factual and non- 
partisan. Communism is an area in which non-partisanship, under present 
political conditions, is impossible to achieve. McCarthy brought on his downfall 
when he attacked the integrity of an Army general. This is the military's most 
valuable attribute and the surest way to lose it would be for the military to 
be recognized by either side as partisan in any type of Communist indoctrination. 

There is much confusion concerning the scope and attendance of cold war 
seminars. The seminars can be divided into four different classifications: (1) 
instruction by military personnel vor their ov.n personnel, (2) seminars for 
military and State Department personnel at the highest level of military education, 
(3) seminars for military personnel in the Reserve and for the public given by 
military instructors, (k) lectures for Reserve personnel and for the public by 


' 2 5stewart Alsop, "Communism: The Meaning of Change," Saturday Evening Post , 
December 5, 1964, p. 12. 


112 


military and civilians. 

As to the first classification, there is little if any question that the 
military should instruct its own personnel concerning Communism with particular 
emphasis on the possibility of subversion within military organizations. Major 
General Edwin A. V/alker was called as a subcoir.nittee witness, as it was generally 
accepted even by the New York Times that he had been censured by the Army 
for his troop indoctrination program, or "pro-3lue" program. This is not so. 
His "pro-Blue" program was considered basically sound and continued implementation 

in the 2*»th Infantry Division was .-ecomended.. General Walker's offense was in 

127 
recommending use of voting materia. s not obtained through military sources. 

Specifically he recommended in talks, as well as in the "Taro Leaf", the official 
publication of the 2*»th Divisior : . a column carrying his signature, that the 
ACA (Americans for Constitutional ction) index was available for use by anyone 
who wished to consult it before vouing. A high rating on the ACA index 
indicated that the Senator or Representative had voted for Americanism and a 
low rating indicated the indivicua". voted for bills that aided Communism. General 
Walker rightly claims that he did not specifically tell anyone how to vote and 
that other indexes were available for anyone who wished to use them. However, no 
mention of this other material was made in the "Taro Leaf". Naively he claimed. 
that these actions were not partisan. General Walker's entire performance 
before the Subcommittee was ineffectual, incoherent, biased almost to a patholog- 
ical degree, and humiliating to the Army. The subcommittee tried to get 

128 
straightforward answers out of General Walker, but it was almost impossible. 

The only recommendation of the hearings in regard to presence of the military 

129 

in the field of Communism was that it should be intensified. 


j Zo Senate Military Cold War Education Hearings , p. 3064. 
l^Senate Military Cold War Education Report , p. 31. 
12H Senate Military Cold War Education Hearings , pps. 1387-153'u 
l29Senate Military Cold War Education Report, p. 27. 


113 


The second classification is that of the seminars of the Industrial College 
and National War College. These, in my opinion, cannot logically be criticized. 
Senior officers of the Defense Department and State Department attend these 
colleges who have already been picked as prospects for top echelon positions 
in the military and foreign policy establishments of our government. The 
speakers at these year-long courses represent the top thinkers in government, 
and industry, past and present, as well as university scholars with accepted 
reputations and other leaders throughout the country. Certainly those students ' 
are able to evaluate the materiel presented. A sampling of the lecturers included 
at the War and Industrial Colleges are Senator Fulbright, ex-Secretary of State 
Dean Acheson, Walter Reuther of United Auto Workers and scholars such as W. W. 
Rostow, Roger Hilsman, Bernard Fall, Paul Hanr.ond, Richard E. Neustadt, Hans 
Morgenthau, Max F. Hillikan, Chrrles 0. Lerchc, Jr., William C. Johnstone, and 
William T. R. Fox, and William C. roster, head of ACDA (United States Arms Control 
Disarmament Agency). 

The only criticism of the War College was special seminars conducted by 
Dr. Frank R. Sarnett, Director of Research for the Institute of American 
Strategy and one of the top men in the Richarcson Foundation, who was responsible 
for presenting material as well as lectures, end it is true that this Foundations 
position is anti -Communist and -:ts view of world conditions is one of protracted 
conflict as espoused by Dr. Robert Strauz-Kupj, Director of the Foreign Policy 
Research Institute, which is also supported by the Richardson Foundation. In 
looking over the names of those connected with these two institutes sponsored 
by the Richardson Foundation, one finds that they are all scholars of repute 
who have held top positions either in govern:.-. out or in universities throughout 
the country, most of them have published works recognized as scholarly and, above 
all they have popularized and, In some degree been responsible for the 


Uh 


Eisenhower-Dulles "massive retaliation" policy. The important point is that 
they represent one sector of the political spectrum in their reasoning toward 
Communism. Every thinking American should understand the point of view of these 
scholars. The Richardson Foundation is reportedly supported by several industrial 
firms engaged in defense industry. There is no evidence that these firms 
influence the thinking of the Foundation but these two organizations present 
only one point of view consistently and the assumption is, though unproved, 
that this position is satisfactory to the sponsor. Frank Barnett has been for 
some time a speaker at the annual conventions of the AHA (American Medical 
Association) and NAM (National Association of Manufacturers). These organizations 
are thoroughly American and their views respected by many, but they, too, represent 
only one portion of the politic;.! spectrum. 

The professional military man is considered generally conservative and 
his position of "peace through military strength" is strongly supported by this 
group of thinkers. In order for the military to remain independent and for 
its judgment to be considered entirely professional, connection with such groups 
must be avoided. For the Richardson Foundation to present lectures, with which, 
according to its own thinking military men are more apt to agree, places the 
military in a political and partisan group and therefore makes it more suscep- 
tible to attacks from opposing political groups and to misinterpretation of its 
motives and actions by the uninformed. 

A third group of seminars is presented throughout the country by the Indus- 
trial College. These have already been discussed.^" They are given to a 
broad group of the American public. Although these lectures cover the entire 
field of world political, geographical, and economic thinking, there have been 


130 


See pps. 59-62 of Chapter III. 


115 


comparatively few objections to them and none traceable to persons attending 
the seminars. From all indications, these seminars are factual, well presented, 
and as non-partisan as a seminar on Comiunism can be. While these seminars 
are always supported by a civilian organization, such as the Chamber of Commerce, 
military men are the only lecturers. 

The fourth type of seminars are the most controversial, reaching by far 
the largest number of people, including all types of Americans from all sectors 
of society, and the instructors are both military and civilian. The most active 
example was Captain Kenneth J. Sanger of the Naval Air Station in Seattle. He 
gave over 200 lectures on Communi s.ti personally, and officers under him gave about 
<*00 in little more than a year. These lectures were given for organizations such 
as Rotary, Lions, Kiwanis, Parer.t Teachers Associations, Mothers Clubs, Church 
Groups, high schools and even colleges. Thes^ lecturing officers roamed the 
entire Pacific Northwest. Capt.in Sanger officially was responsible for training 
given to reserve officers who normally attend training once a week. Seminars 
on Communism were certainly within the scope of his training directive. Reserve 
officers were urged to give similar lectures to the public. It can easily be 
seen, with such a diffusion of effort and regardless of how factual or non- 
partisan the basic data may be, interpretation inevitably creeps in and the 
source of the material is credited to the military. Captain Sanger testified 
that his program in Seattle was given wholehearted support by the Seattle -Times , 
Post-Intelligence and the Pacific Northwest Progress , the three leading newspapers 
in Seattle. The subcommittee brought out the complaints of the Daily Worker , 

New York Times and Time Magazine about Captain Sanger's program but congratulated 

131 

Captain Sanger profusely on his efforts. 


131 Senate Military Cold War Education Hearings, pps. 2k\7-Zk5$, 


116 


As has been stated, the subcommittee reco.imended continuance of military 
participation in these seminars, saying that the complaints were for the most 
part picayune or unjustified, but in a few cases valid.' 32 while no organiza- 
tions were pin-pointed, the valid cases, without doubt, consisted of a very 
few times in which Dr. George S. Benson, John Green, and Dr. Clifton L. Ganus 
of Harding College, Admiral Chester Ward (Retired), or Dr. Fred C. Schwarts, 

William P. Strube, Herbert Philbrick, and Richard Arens of the Christian Anti- 

133 
Communism Crusade appeared. " That the military should not participate with any 

of these gentlemen or organizations appears unquestioned. The fact that the 

military did appear with, or sponsor, these organizations on less than six 

occasions out of the hundreds of meetings, that these occasions received the 

publicity which they should have.- and that all meetings became tarred with 

the same brush, should have alerted the military to take action to protect its 

professionalism. There is no record that this was done. In fact, the articles 

in Time 13 and the New York Time: 135 which accused the military of having officers 

presenting "right-wing" doctrine. w 2 re found to be unreliable. Senator Strom 

Thurmond labelled these criticisms as misleading, distorted, and factually 

inaccurate. If the testimony of the officers concerned, which was under 

oath before a Senate subcommittee, is to be believed, Senator Thurmond's 

assessment is correct. However, the label of "right-wing" trends did not change 

because of the Senate hearings. No retraction by Time or the New York Times 


132< 

"'""■= military k.oia war taucation )<l poT, p. 2y. 

3057-3060. 



Senate Military Cold War Education Report, p. 180. 
J/ Senate Military Cold War Education Hear.nqs , testimony 
.'deling, Sanger, Wagasky, Warden, passim. 


under Goldthwaite, 


117 


has been found. The damage to military profess! onalism was already accomplished. 

Accepting the thesis of President Eisenhower and the subcommittee that the 
military are best prepared to ec'ucate the public on Communism, which is a 
debatable conclusion, and accepting the fact that accusations against the 
military have been exaggerated, it is still true that respected and thoughtful 
commentators have made the accusation that the military are assisting in 
spreading "right-wing" doctrine. Only one Navy Captain expressed any concern 
about "guilt by association," ard ;;,is after a specific question as to this 
possibility by Senator Stennis. 130 Witness after witness, including President 
Eisenhower, Admiral Radford, General Hewlett, Admiral Burke, and Ex-Secretary 
of Oefense Gates thought that military participation in these seminars was 
fulfilling a natJoial need.' 39 That senior officers do not see any danger to 
military professionalism indicates the degree to which the function of the 
military in a democratic society is now accepted. Supposedly no one would 
object if, at one of these seniuar3, Senator Thurmond was to participate or 
no one would object if Senator Ful bright participated. It is doubtful if Senator 
Fulbright would be invited, but there is no dcubt that these two respected and 
intelligent Americans would present different points of view, even using the 
same factual data. The cold war and Caaraunisn, which is internally subversive 
as wall as externally dangerous to national survival, are partisan political 
questions. The military should ec/jcate its ov.'n members but public education, 
except on strictly military sub^ecis that have already had administration 
approval, is not a proper field for the militc.ry, if the professionalism which 
requires politically unbiased advice is to renain inviotate. Public education 


u yiBTd ., passim. 


118 


should be left to our democratic Institutions—educators, politicians, press and 

pulpit. If the public is not being properly educated on these matters, then 

the political leaders should take action* 

The subcommittee recommends tl on is 

that adequate guidelines, policies end procedures be established to 
insure that proposed semlnt.rs will be given advance screening, assessment 
and evaluation to preclude military involvement in a seminar (a) not based 
on a broad base of ccroaunity support; (b) at which a controversial or parti- 
san speaker is to appear on the progrem; (c) at which partisan or political 
subjects are to be discussed; or (d).which otherwise Involves partisan, 
political, or controversies issues." 

It is a aisconccption, despite estseraed opinion to the contrary, that Communism, 

in any of its aspects, can be the jubject of a seminar without Decerning partisan, 

political, or controversial, as required by tt.e subcommittee recomrendation. 

If this fact were recognized, than the recoir.-.. ndafcion of the subcommittee is 

acceptable; otherwise the raitifc;r> cannot publicly enter this Meld without 

damage to its professional reputation, as well as to the country. 

Ethos and Peace 

Knowledge of the distinguishing characteristics, habits, attitudes, 
beliefs, and standard of conduct of a group creates confidence or lack of 
confidence in the group as a whole. 

Dr. John A. Hannah, President of Michigan State University and former 

Assistant Secretary of Defense vor Manpower and Personnel, in testifying before 

the Armad Services Ccnsnittee, siidt 

Before I came to thi3 post I weighel West Point and Annapolis solely 
on the basis of educational r-ounc's. . . While there are mm things they 
may not do as wall as our good civilian Institutions. . . thay do one 
thing cuch batter and that ie they do in it. .1 in their students. . • a 
loyalty to the service, a loyalty to the government, an appreciation for 
ethics and Integrity to a decree beyond what we do at our civilian insti- 
tutions.''* 1 


! ^°Senate Military Cold War Education Report, p. 8. 
14lMas!and and Radway, og.. c-it., p. 125. 


119 

Has land and Radway say that the service academies spend more time on character 
building than on anything else and that they are the repositories of the service 
ethos and are acquiring young men at a relatively impressionable age, so they are 

able to 

define the ideals to which they expect their officers, from whatever source 
derived, to aspire. Here they (service academies) formulate the standards 
of excellence suggested by their corporate experience. Here, they confront 
the prospective martial leader with the great models of the past. Hopefully 
and prayerfully the desired characteristics of heart and mind are laid 
before young men, and every incentive that can be imagined is employed to 
encourage them to follow. '^2 

Among the ideals of the American officer already discussed are pride in his pro- 
fessionalism, dedication to civilian supremacy, and obedience as the highest 
virtue. Huntington has provided the most complete discussion of the military 
ethic. One of the traits he assigns to the military is that of pacifism.'^ a 
dictionary definition of pacifism is: "opposition to all war and armed hostili- 
ty, "l^ Under this definition Huntington is incorrect and the military cannot 
logically be considered pacifist. However, the love of war which is militaristic 
is the counterpart of the love ov' peace which is pacifist. If this latter conno- 
tation is used for pacifism then Huntington's argument has some merit. The 
Military are for peace but it is a peace guaranteed by superior military strength. 

"Power for Peace" has been the slogan of the U. S. Armed Forces since 1961. 
The military do not believe that strong forces bring wars; rather they believe 
that the strongest nation will never be attacked if the weaker nation knows the 
true relative strength and knows the stronger nation will use its force if 
attacked. The military further believe, as has been previously stated, that the 


1 '* 2 Ibid., p. 169. See also chapter on "character building," pps. 197-231. 

'^Huntington, op_. cit ., p. 79. Chapter 3 is recommended for anyone who 
desires a more complete discussion, pps. 59-79. 

'^Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language, College Edition, 
1962. 


120 


United States has never been prepared for a war and that in this thermonuclear 

age there must be no doubt in the mind of a potential enemy that this country 

will be protected. They also believe that the decision for peace or war is 

a political one and the military must be ready at anytime to win a war that is 

not of their choice. This is not the pacifism which means opposition to any 

war but it does not eliminate a dedication for peace. To quote General 

KacArthur: "Ho one desires peace as much as the soldier, for he must pay the 

greatest penalty in war." 1 '* 5 General Sarksdale Hamlett, Deputy Chief of Staff 

of the Army, recently said, 

Today, the common defense requires a military establishment capable 
of supporting American foreign policy who^e ultimate goal is to secure an 
enduring peace. A necessary, intermediate step in accomplishing this opal 
is to deter or defeat Communist attempts at inroads of the Free World. P* 

General Thomas D. White, former Or ef of Staff of the Air Force says, quoting 

President Kennedy, 

The primary purpose of our arms is pc;ace, not war— to make certain 
that they will never have to be used—to Jeter all wars, general or 
limited, nuclear or conventional, large or small— to convince all aggres- 
sors that any attack would be futile— to provide backing for diplomatic 
settlement of disputes— to insure the adequacy of our bargaining power for 
an end to the arms race. . . Our military posture must be sufficiently 
flexible and under control to be consistent with our efforts to explore 
all possibilities and to take every step to lessen tensions, to obtain 
peaceful solutions and to secure arms limitations. W 

Then General White continues his argument to the effect that we need flexi- 
bility in all strategies, meaning more manned bombers, and should not forswear 
the "first strike" capability. '^ This type of argument is not inconsistent 
with a love for peace; however it does recognise the likelihood of war, and 
that peace can be maintained oniy through military strength. Similarly this 
concern for peace is shown by General J. Lawton Collins, former 


'^"Selected Quotations: U. S. Military Leaders," Office of the Chief of 
Milita r y History , Department of the Army, May 10, 1955, p. 42. 

'^General Barksdale Hamlett, Army Information Digest , May 11, 1964, p. 11. 

WGen. Thomas D. White, "The Pendulum Is Swinging Too Far," Newsweek, 

February, 24, 19o4, p. 22. as. , 

148 Loc. cit. 


121 


Army Chief of Staff, who said that it was tima to think mora about preventing 
a war than about preparing for war. 

Othy Programs 

Another of the main allegations of the anti-war group is that concentration 
on the military aspects of fighting Communi sm prevents serious consideration of 
other programs of more importance. Senator Fulbright expressed the idea that 
the military lacked the experience and judgment to put into proper perspective 
the President's total "strategy vo- a nuclear age." 1 ^ Proposals to decrease 
tension' ^ are among the goals cr the present administration, as thay were under 
Eisenhower. Before he had beer, in office a month, President Johnson told 
disarmament officials that in his ...pinion the Kennedy administration would be 
remembered longest for the nuclear test ban t; eaty and that the greatest goal 
of his own administration would b^ world peao.. and he urged these officials to 

search for new ways to reach this goal; however, he reiterated that the United 

1 52 
States would continue to lead from strength in its search for peace. * In April 

of 1964 President Johnson announced a reduction in the production of enriched 

uranium Khrushchev followed with a similar announcement. 1 53 

With disarmament there wou'.d be no further need of the industrial base 

to support a huge military establishment. This would require a reconversion of 

industry to other pursuits and would release funds and other resources for such 

programs as the "war on poverty," aid to education, improvement to highways, and 

assistance to underdeveloped countries, to nane a few. It should be expected 

that the military would oppose disarmament as contrary to the "peace through 


'^scmuel P. Huntington, The Common Defense, p. 46. 

150soe Note 88 on p. 65. 

ISlThese include all phases of disarmament, "test ban" under Kennedy, "open 
skies" under Eisenhower and while they can be considered under one group as means 
to lessen tension, they should not be confused as they are distinct proposals. 

152"johnson Pledges Drive For Peace," He.i York Times, December 15, 1963, p. 21. 

>53Kansas Citv Star. Associated Press Dispatch, April 20, 1964, p. 1. 


122 


military strength" concept which it supports* But the reverse seems to have 

more substance. Disarmament has been accepted by the military as a political 

question to be decided by civilians. While, r.ost assuredly the military has 

never advocated disarmament, and it has loyally presented alternatives 

connected with problems of inspection which would provide adequate assurance 

that treaties could not be vioUtcJ without the guaranteed knowledge of the 

United States. Julius Duscha wis, as via have seen, is very critical of the 

military-industrial complex, says, 

The major force working against disarmament and reconversion planning 
in the United States today is not the military; nor is it the 18,000 cor- 
porations holding defense contacts, the thousands of sub-contractors, and 
the thousands of communities that depend on defense plants and military 
bases for their prosperity. The main obstacle is massive popular and 
governmental distrust (includes the military and perhaps to a greater 
degree than most governmant agencies) of the Soviet Union— based on the 
Soviet record of aggression and broken agreements. ' 

Similarly Jack Raymond of the New York Times claims that the JCS has worked hard 

at disarmament and arms control,. They endorsed the test ban treaty with 

"aditsonitions of caution and apparent disappointment that they would not get a 

chance to test warheads for sons or their weapons." '' Congress, on the other 

hand, has many rr.CT.ber3 interested ",i disansanr-nt but they have neve;* been able 

to get a majority to agree on ore positive program. And there are .any who are 

much more bellicose than the military. An ex; uple is Congressman Craig Hosmer 

of California who last November, warned the country against the "nuiballs" and 

"domestic idiots" working for the U. S. Arms Control and DisarraaraenS Agency. 

This latter organization has a high-level conr.ittee of military generals and 

admirals working for it continuously at the Pentagon, and also has an Army unit 

on a full-time basis at Fort Kocd testing inspection and verification techniques." 


j" Julius Duscha, "The Disarmament Blues," Harper's Magazine, Hay 1964, p. 57. 

! ^Raymond, o£. cit., p. 2/3. 

JViQuscha, loc. cit . 

,:> 'Lloyd Norman, "Gap in the Clouds of Wer," Army , March, 1964, pps. 23-28. 


123 


As far as reconversion is concerned, Secretary McNaraara has several times 
urged industry to consider non-defense markets and has warned that defense budgets 
have reached their peak and will dacrease in the future. 15 There appears to be 
no basis to the charge that the military has not supported the administration 
on disarmament or reconversion es concepts, nor has it unduly objected to the 
theory of a decline in overall defense appropriations. As can be expected, each 
service has objected strenuously to cuts within its own service while, at the 
same time, supporting the proposition of a reduction in the overall defense 
budget. It is interesting to note that Genercl Bradley said, after his retirement, 
that he never should have testified on what the country could afford in budget 
hearings on military appropriations but should have confined his remarks to mil- 
itary requirements needed for security of the country. 159 He later realized that, 
by supporting the administration by testimony outside his field of expertise, 
he had to a degree compromised his military professionalism. 

The United States People-tc-People Progrcn was launched by President 
Eisenhower in May 1956. One of the committees formed to launch this effort was 
the Armed Services Committee, responsible for directing the program's activities 
for the Array, Navy, and Air Force. The Army Veterinary Corps has advisory 
groups in areas ranging from Ethiopia and Iran to Bolivia, Panama, San Salvador, 
Thailand, Vietnam, Okinawa to help raise sanitary standards. There is a Medical 
Civil Action Program sponsored by the military in Vietnam, Thailand, Colombia, 
Turkey, Korea, and other places. It is well known that the Army advisors in 
Vietnam are assisting the villagers to raise crops, build schools, improve 
drainage. The Army Engineers ara busy in many countries performing the same 


15 Russell Hawkes, "DOD Official Urges Industry to Consider Non-Defense 
Markets." Missiles and Rocket3, Docesaber 23, 1963, p. 16. 

'59mHiam T. R. Fox, World Politics, April. 1955, p. kik. 


124 

type of civil works that they do in the United States. Perhaps these jobs 
should be done by civilian groups like the Pe ice Corps but they are forwarding 
the President's program for detuicracy in underdeveloped countries. 

Richard Van Wagenen studied tiio views of American officers on the United 
Nations. He says that none of 'chvti saw the UN as a potential world government 
in the near future. All realized the UN's limitations but none even hinted 
that the United States should desert it or give it fewer functions. Several 
wanted the UN to reach decisions that could be enforced, even against the United 
States. 1 6l 

There is no evidence, as would be expected, that the military supports or 
doesn't support the President's programs on cultural exchanges or domestic 
programs such as thi poverty progren* But Senator Fulbright's contention that 
the military lacks the experience and judgasnt to put into proper perspective 
the President's "total strategy for a nuclear age" is also unsubstantiated. 
Support of the United Nations, reconversion of industry, disarmament and other 
methods to lessen tension—all far is of the President's overall program have 
not met opposition from the military. 

Two Kir.ds of Capitalism 

"Corporate executives seem increasingly possessed by the idea that they 

roust define and formulate their responsibilities to their publics, both inside 

162 
and outside the firm." 1 According to Paul A. Samuelson there are two categories 

.' -..,'. ...'. „_...: 

Old fashioned profit iraximizing mar'-ats that are perfectly or imperfectly 


' 60 Lt. Gen. Leonard 0. Heat;n„ "Ambassadors in White," Army I n formation Pi qest. 
Hay 19S5, pes. 32-37. — — 

'"'Richard W. Van Wagenen, "American Defeise Officials Views on the U. N„" 
Western Political O i ^rterly, Vol. 'A, 1961, p. 116. 

ro^Earl F. Cheit, ed.. The 3 u::iness Establishment, p. 159. 


125 


competitive} and the new notion of 'managerial capitalist'— that the 
corporation (and its officials) are responsive to the interests of all 
parties—employees, customers., sharcwon«r.3, the public, the federal govern- 
ment. 1 ^ 

The old fashioned kind of capitalism was .supposedly an American product 
which made this country great. It consisted of minimum government control, 
competition, a market mechanism that protected the public welfare automatically, 
relieved industry of any social responsibility except for a good product 
at a competitive price, the profit motive, and self-interest as a guiding 
principle . 

Robert L. Heilbronner quotes William Feather, a publishing executive and 

regular contributor to Nation's n;.- -jness, 33 faying in 1926t 

The one-hundred per ccui American believes in the doctrin?. of selfish- 
ness, although ha is often u ;.c.T.ed to admit it. . «, . The Amirican idea is 
that every man is out to promt* his own interest, end he has discovered 
that the best way to do this 's to make ! imself useful to others. ... It 
is inconceivable to a one-. 1 an red per cert American that anyone except a 
nut should give something for nothing.' 

The naw fashioned kind of tcrJtalism is the Gospel of Social Responsibility 

and is typified by Thomas J. WaiKo.i, Jr., President of IBM (International Business 

Kachir.cs }, Mho says, 

Only with the past few years have Icrge number of business leaders 
publicly esknevj] edged and j;ctively preact.ed the doctrine that they are 
servants of society and th£;t rnanagorasnt rrerely in the interest (narrowly 
defined) of stockholders is not the sole end of their duties. Indeed, 
discussion of the 'social responsibilities of business' has becoroe.not 
only acceptable in leading business circles, but even fashionable.' * 


l^lbid., pps. 203-2CA. 
fflfd.. p. 13. 

■-- '- ^^.:-r.j S-—'.:.: '. : - :\b. :•;<:•:: _ cv i±.:. Si:;ir.ssr.-::n, p„ kk* 


126 


The Constitution was adopted according to the preamble in order to form 
a more perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide 
for the comnron defense, promote tha general welfare, and secure the blessings 
of liberty to ourselves and our pofteri-ty. To Shis list of objective; could be 
added one proposed by Gunnar Myrdal who says, "The primary role of government in 
the economy I conceive to be the one of creating conditions for business that 
result in rapid and steady economic growth."* " Some may consider that Myrdal's 
statement is included in promoting the general welfare, because the role of 
government in economic problems has been radically altered since the Constitution 
was adopted. The founders believed tn freedeu for man in all his rights (political, 
religious, ethical or economic),, to firmer belief was prevalent: free enterprise 
and the protection of individual property was meant to be protected at all costs. 
By free enterprise, the founding fathers meant leaving business to control 
its own affairs to the maximum octant. This concept changed through experience. 
Free enterprise, left alone, wau found to be self«destructive, by the growth of 
huge industries and monopolies. Arnold A. Rocow and Harold D. Lasswftll say 
that even Adam Smith, the apostia of free enterprise, was aware that competition 
left to itself becomes monopoly through conspiracy, and that monopolies conspire 
to maintain themselves.' 67 This stabMMt, all ost buried in Smith's philosophy, 
should not be given undue weight but it does indicate that the apostle of 
American capitalism was aware of the dangers of monopoly which could prevent a 
free market. In the initial period (approximately 100 years) in United States 
history, of absence of government restrictions, the large enterprises gobbled up 


] "Gunnar Myrdal, Challenges to Democracy, edited by Edward Reed, p. 11. 
'°' Arnold A. Rogow & HaroUTb. Lasswell, Power Corruption and Rectitude, 
p. 93. 


127 


the small and merged with each ether so that the public had only one supply 
channel and the monopolies prevented cempetiters from entering the r-arket by 
price lsi.'3, or any other method they could devise. 

Cyclical booms and depression; and the fc.ct that businessmen considered 
that wages to be paid laborers mutt be determined by the market, placed a good 
portion of citizens in economic peril. Depressions occurred 22 tlir.as from 
1762 to 1938, with 6 of these listed as major depressions or panics^ and the 
one from I837 to 1843 lasting 72 months. 16 *' To eliminate these evil.; and to 
further protect the majority of the citizenry^ the United States decided upon 
government control of industry. T;is control began moderately with the 
Interstate CcEnarce Act of I887 wh ch was enacted to regulate railroads, in 
which industry some of the larger.-.; fortunes were made and unscrupulous practices 

.-■- ■ Kepiurn 

Act in 1906 and Clayton Anti-tri'5» Act in 191':, increasing gradually until now 
there are over 100 government agencies dealing with the regulation of business* 

Government planning for business is anathema to businessmen* Business- 
men praise Adem Smith's classic; ! economic theory, but behave contrary to its 
rules. They point to agriculture as definite proof that government spending 
prevents a solution and that government interference has made it so the market 
system could not work. They firmly believe that too much planning Inhibits 
innovation* Nevertheless, John E. Bunting, in his book, The Hidden Face of 
Free Enterprise, brings out soma relevant facts* His thesis runs as follows: 
Americans now want security. Scarcity for most has been overcome. World War 
II proved beyond doubt that government spending can produce a boom. Business- 
men do everything they can to thwart natural economic law— not because they 


,6d Ri chard A. Morris, Encyclopedia of American History, p. 508. 


128 


don't believe in the market system—but because they believe in their own self- 
interest. Businessmen do not want the market system to work in their own firm. 
They want the market system for everyone but themselves. A businessman wants 
to control the price of his own product and hrs continually sought to control 
the market and not have the market control his business. Businessman want to 
be free to make profits and, to do this, they .mist not expect to be insured 
against loss, believing that prcfits are something they deserve rather than being 
a reward for superior performance. During th& depression beginning in 1929, 
businessman were the first to coma to the government for assistance. 
As Frederick Allen says: 

Host businessmen believe in corcpetition—theoretically but constantly 
search for ways to prevent it, so that rival companies in an industry might 
all jack up their profits end enlarge thtir profits. Again and again the 
heads of various steel companies, let us say, would form a 'pool ■■•make an 
agreement not to sell below a certain price. But these often lasted only 
long enough for sexsone to gal on the phcne.'7° 

As classical an economist as William Ropke says that 

to restrict competition, then, is tc jeopardize the principle of 
economic reciprocity. If this much is clear, then the conclusion can no 
longer be avoided that the grewth of monopoly represents an extremely 
serious disfigurement of our economic system.''' 

Any businessman holds that competition has macs Atari ca a great country and 

is the essence of capitalism. This is the theory which businessmen adhere to 

and will fight for politically, but actually they believe and at times 

honestly say, "The only way to insure profits is to stick together, keep prices 

high, and maybe push them higher. 1 " 2 


169 
'John E. Bunting, The Hidien Face of Fr^c Enterprise, pps. 2, 21, 36, 63, 
74,120.324. C ** 

'/^Frederick Lewis Allen, Tte Big Change , p. 74. 

'''William Ropke, trans 1ateT"by Patrick M. Boarman, Economics of a Free 
Society , p. 236. 

"^Bunting, 0£. cit. . p. 17. 


129 


Joseph Rosenfarb, in his bco!; Freedom and the Administrative State, gives 

as his thesis 

that an economy in which continuous planning is essential is inherent 
in our economic system, and that a managed economy founded on private enter- 
prise, and democratically controlled and oriented, should be America's 
contribution to modern statecraft and social systems. '73 

It appears that recommendations for increased national economic planning by the 

federal government might be necessary if individual liberty for the greatest 

number of citizens is to be attained. No one can deny that, as long as there 

is a poverty level in the United States, the individuals on this level are 

being denied freedom. 

Full consumption has teen denied a vast segment, if not the majority, 
of the nation's population. So long as the present income exists, a full 
consumption and full production economy will be a pious but unrealizable 
goal for those insisting or. the preservation of the fundamental economic 
inequalities which have flourished under Republicans and Democrats alike, "* 

Government control is no longer the question in the United States; the 

question is whether regulation will bring both service and more enjoyment to 

more Americans and will prohibit private monopoly, Leslie B. Worthirigton, 

President of U. S. Steel Corporation, says that there are now four branches of 

the U. S. Government: the executive, legislative, judicial, and regulatory; this 

latter branch is composed of the 60 federal agencies that not only regulate but 

also 

investigate and sometimes castigate almost every action and activity 

taken or planned by businesses big and small, successful and unsuccessful. . 

. No businessman in America objects to regulatory procedures which are 


173joseph Rosenfarb, Freedom and the Administrative State , p, X, 
17^Gabriel Kolko, "The American Income Revolution" as quoted in America 
As a Mass Society , Philip Olson, editor, p. II 1 *, 


130 


designed to stimulate and insure fair competitive practices. If this is 
their true and only purpose, then such regulations will never bother him 
at all. 1 '-' 

It is important that even business now accepts regulation to insure fair compe- 
tition, which was not the case at the turn of the century, but it is also true 
that business and industry believe unccir.preai singly that there is too much regu- 
lation and they bitterly contest additional regulations. 

There appears to be a dichotomy in the beliefs of industry. Thomas J. Watson, 
Jr., President of IBM (International Business Machines), says: 

For centuries the businc. ; ; ;:an has hzzn a favorite whipping boy and the 
reasons are plain to see. 3u:.iness acquired wealth. With weatth, they gained 
power. And until this century, much of that power was employed almost 
solely in their own interests^ 1 ' 

Or. Clare Eliasr Griffin say^s 

Thore is evident among many ir.sra tho-jghtful business leaders a growing 
sense of ethical obligation; to workers and an appreciation of the intangible 
values of morale which have led th:se loaders to seek practical ways of 
meeting this problem (individual econonic security), 177 

Conservatives Donald Kesnasrer and C. Clyda. Jones conclude: 

The new way of giving people the maximum of liberty is by protecting 
them frera the selfish acts of others. Lotting everyone do pretty much as 
he pleased was the old way, but that will no longer work in a country as 
crowded and an economy as complex as ours. '78 

Modern businessmen have social res pons ibi Sites. Business pays social 

security taxes, provides recreational facilities, builds tru3t funds, manages 

insurance policies, pays minimum wages decided by law or collective bargaining. 

United Fruit, after many years o : exploiting to the hilt its holdings in Central 

America, has adopted a system of sharing by emphasizing private initiative. A 

change becesse necessary for them tc .emain in business in Central Air.arica.' 79 


175 
"'-- -■ ■ — l'~."thingt ... ■-. inesi Worry Too Much Regulation-' U. s. News 

and World Report. March 9, 1964, p. 16. 

- '••' tr», ■ iness Mar -,d_ its B elief} , pps, .;-s. 

178 C,sre £1c2r Griffin » Ent( rc -isa in a Fi ee Society, p. 566. 
j 7 q0onald Kcrxarer and C. Ciyda Jonos, tor rican Economic Histcrv. p. 611. 
Paul Deutschaan, "United Fruit's Experiment in International Partnership, 11 
Readers' nfff»»t-. October 1964, pps. 146-150. 


131 


These and many more examples of social awareness and progress could be cited by 

American industry. Still, the naro typical opinion of the majority of businessmen 

is the attitude of Roger Blough, U% S. Steel executive! "For a co.-poratton to 

attempt to exert any kind of cccnoiiic compulsion to achieve a particular end in 

the social area seems to be quits beyond what a corporation should <Jo."'^° 

Social iinprovemont for workers singly cannot replace the profit motive entirely 

if corporations are to exist. Professor Hilton Friedman contends that the doctrine 

of management's social responsibility is 

fundamentally subversive, ... Few treads could so thoroughly 
undermine the very foundations of our trt ; society as the acceptance by 
corporate officials of a serfffl responsibility other than to make as much 
money for their stockholders as possible.' 8 ' 

Earl F. Chcit claims that 

top management, in factj, is committed more strongly than over to 
the corporations 's profit position as a result of the growth of stock tft , 
option plans, because without profits the options are largely worthless. 

The gains of society in general appear to have come from public and 

governmental pressure rather thsn from a fundrasntal change in business motives. 

U. S. Steel conceded that its decision to open higher-paying jobs to Negroes in 

its Fairfield, Alabama, plant was because of federal government pressure and the 

leverage of government contracts.' 3 It is true that many American businessmen 

take their responsibility to society seriously. The new managerial power system 

predicted by James Burnham has not come to pa£3 but there is no proof that 

managers reject the values of ownership or the goal of maximizing profit.' 8 ** 

Of course managers act for other reasons, such as power, prestige, and job 

security. Businessman also support the Coauuinity Chest, employment of the 


% fifl 

Andrew Hacker, "Do Corporations Have A Social Duty?", Hew York Times 

Magazine, NovcxScr 17, 1963, p. 21. 

]°«Cheit, oo,. cit., p. 163. 

lo TMd., p. 180 and James Burnhom, The Managerial Revolution . 


132 

handicapped, research in the social sciences, symphony orchestras, religious 
tolerance, the United Nations, economic education of tho American people, liberal 
foreign trade policy, intellectual refugess from China, freedom of the press, 
conservation of forests, and maintenance of private colleges. 185 Titf3 new "Gospel 
of Social Responsibility" stresses responsibility to shareholders, to customers, 
to the industry, to the nation, to everyone. 

Undoubtedly there are men like Watson who say, "Bigness is a relative new 
phenomenon in our society. Even If nothing ol;e had changed the vast concentrations 
of power in our society would u- i that busi.iassraen reconsider their responsi- 
bilities for the broader public .et?are"' 86 Thare seems little argument with 
the fact that industry is search-tic: for a new ideology and taking a more tolerant 
view both of lebor and of govorrE.;sut. 

Heilbronner says, 

There is no reason to doubt that the corporation manager today has 
an increased concern for hunan welfare and a more sophisticated appreciation 
of hissan wants than was the esse a few decades agoj times and ideas havo 
changed. At tho sacs tlms—and this is helf explicit in the ideological 
statements we have cxemincd—there are evident mixed motives in the wooing 
of the man on the plant floor. Greater productive efficiency, the 
discouragement of unionism, tha inculcation of pro-company sentiment, the 
procursaant of labor peace~.thos« are clc.rly among the motives underlying 
raanagcTant's concern for hisan.,vs1uas in eddition to its announced 
solicitude for the individu: V s ' 

Further Heilbronner says there "is the explicit admission that corporate 

management can act in interests ©tfcsr than those of classical theory,, that is, 

in at least partial disregard of tha traditional dictates of profit making." 188 

Ha also bolieves that the new literal business ideology will come to dominate 

the older idcetogy and may prove to be the mae. is by which many necessary 


ofchait, on. cit., p. 160. 

!ft3B&» P" '59. 
ISIBR., p. 26. 


233 


load. , p. 33. 


133 

adaptions are made In our social system,' 69 Or. the other hand there are 
others who rerark, when the new hu.an relation 3 policies are put to any 
specific business actions of decision, that the important question still 1st 
Is it dons only where it pays? Even sympathetic critics have failed to 
answer the question: "To whoa is the corporation responsible?" 19 ' 

Ethos Compared 

The optimistic view that the new ethic of business is that of social 
responsibility has many supporters,, There is -onsidarabte evidence that it is 
having effect but the opposite view 33 present: that the profit restive is the 
only logical one and that social if iroViaent cist coara as a by-product to strict 
adherence to the classical econo.it, views of competition, supremacy of the 
market, and minimus government control. Busir.sss ideology apparently is in 
a transitional state. The importer* point is Aat there are divergent viewpoints. 
There is no accepted standard and the preponderance of evidence is that it is 
a selfish ethic. Whether this is last for Arae/ica is not the point* but that 
self-interest is still the control ting ethic for industry. The miiftary ethic, 
on the other hand, provides a constant standard by which the miltey can be 
judged, and it is essentially an id elfish ethic. The military believe in their 
ethic as a protection for their professional^ i and for democratic institutions. 

It cannot be realistically expected that ihe military man and businessman 
would have the same code of ethics. In the first place the professional military 
man belongs to a closely coordinated, compact fjroup and, while on active duty, 
is under rigid organizational control. Violation of the military ethic brings 


| 89 Loc. cit. 

II3S&7*. i6i. 

' 91 Ibid., p. 25. 


13** 


almost automatic censure from within the group, which may include dismissal from 
the service. Businessman belonc to a loosely connected group, with practically 
no group control as far as ethics is concerned, They coma from every walk of 
life, enter, leave, and reenter the business group at will, some arc educated 
and some not, and they form a criS: -section of Americans in almost all particulars* 
They are no moro idealistic or responsible than the average American. Obedience 
is the highest virtue to the miliary, while freedom or liberty receive £he most 
praise from industry and business. 

The motives of the two groups are entirely different. The military man is 
dedicated to preserving American desocratic traditions and Ms responsibility 
is the security of the country. The success of a businessman is primarily 
measured roono'carily. Without profit, there is no industry, and if business does 
not prosper, neither do the people of the United States. Ar.ssrican businessmen 
may have made America great by their strict ac/tarence to the profit and loss 
system. It is no condemnation cf industry anc business to state that the primary 
dedication of the average busin::a :an is to making money and not to preserving 
American institutions. This is not to say that American businessmen and 
industrialists are not patriots, b. cause they are. In times of peril to the 
country they can be depended upen, but in day-to-day operations profit is their 
motivating force* For the most part industrialists believe that what is good 
for industry is good for America. This also rnmybe a true statement* "Manufac- 
turers," Judge Elbert Gary, (U. S. Steel President) once stated, ".r. :st have 

192 
reasonable profits to do their cut/*" It is too strong to say, bit it is 

implied that no profits result in no duty. But it can be said that, with profits, 


192 

Edward Pendleton Herri nc, "he Impact c? War, p. 198. 


135 


the businessman finds his duty to his country a stronger motivating force and 
the danger can also be implied that, with greater profits, the duty to country 
nay bacons a greater motivating force. 

The recent anti-trust suits against steel ccxpany officials, jail sentences 
for electrical industry executives.-, Security Exchange Commission (SEC) 
investigation of the American Stock Exchange during which its president quickly 
resigned, and conflict of interest controversies in the Chrysler Corporation 
and Prudential Life Insurance Co.".<pcny, involving the presidents of both firras 
r.aybe isolated incidents and it is not to cay that business in general accepts 
these practices; it is only intended to say that there is no overall moral code 
which sets the standard, as the military ethic does for the military. The lack 
of simitar incidents eieang the ciMtary, rotimd as well as active, is a credit 
to its ideals as well as to the control within the establishment. 

It is true that business has accepted an ethic as represented by "Better 
Business Bureaus" and it can be briefly but inadequately surasarized' 9 ^ as, 
"Honesty is the best policy." Thane organizations provide protection for the 
consider as well as for the good names of rop.:able firms. Their growth, in 
many cases, was instigated and prorated by these businessmen who fo.red additional 
governsent controls might be forthcoming, particularly in questionable advertising 
practices, if business did not willingly polios its own actions. Their influence 
is mostly local in nature, not national in scope, and it does not constitute a 
creed applicable autcraati catty under alt conditions and uniform in its standard, 
in any way comparable to the military ethic. 

Milts has said that the hierarchies of corporation, state, and military are 
interchangeable.' 3 it has already been shown that military men are going to 


Ml 

"-'"Says Business Morality Reflects Basic Mores," Kansas City Star, January 
7, 1965. p. 12. 

,:w M1tlB, op. cit., p. 10. 


136 


industry for a second career, upon retirement, in increasing number:. Is there 

a conflict of interest in this ciavoloptsant? It could not be expected that 

industry would take thousands of military roan and give them important jobs for 

altruistic reasons. Undoubtedly industry gets full reward for these services 

and has found retired officers Jo be valuable employees. Business Weak says, 

'■The marriage of business and military is a happy one. Beyond all else, the 

military can is loyal and his integrity is puncture-proof."! 95 Furthermore, 

the leaders of the military had to join hands to shape industry in 1J&1 and 

the need of industry for experienced managers has not abated. Fotv.or Secretary 

. / - .'.-■-.... . .; :2Ui Z--J2} 

retired officers who era now onploycd in private enterprise are 
making a significant and perhaps irreplaceable contribution to national 
defense and the industrial capacity of this country.l9° 

Aviation Weak reports that "retired officers have not only technical knowledge 

but also a major as»unt of executive, administrative, and pure business ability.""? 

Military man, with their ethic of absolute obedience and loyalty, their ded- 
ication to their own service, their knowledge of Pentagon methods, and, above 
all, their conviction that national security rests upon military strength, can 
be strong advocates for defense industry by means of entering industry upon a 
second career. And when industrialists talk of the absolute loyalty and integrity 
of military employees, they are speaking of loyalty to business executives or 
to the corporation which has hired them. Congressman Hebert says, "The question 
of defense industry hiring of fomtsr military men is a delicate one. The cases 
are not all black and they are not all white. That's why we have to be careful.""^ 


"'"Generals Make Good in Business," Businass Meek, October 27, 1956, pps. 

7W6 fg6 

""Katharine Johnsen, "Gat<s defends Officers in Industry Against Congres- 
sional Attacks," Aviation Week. July 13, 1959.. p. 35. 

'9/Katherine Johnsen, "Conf.r«sre3n--Reti:ed Officers Termed Scjrces of 
Pressure," Aviation Week. Aug. 17, 1959, p. 32. 

1 '"Raymond, op. cit ., p. 2J0. 


137 


The logical conclusion is that the military ethic is a strong safeguard for 
the country while the military man is tn uniform, but it may work against 
national interests when he is a civilian member of the industrial portion of 

the complex* 

Congress 

As stated previously, Congress is so actively engaged in all aspects of 
the military-industrial complex, from budgetary appropriations to procurement 
contracts, that the complex is wore accurately named the Congressional-industrial- 
military complex* No atic.-r.pt will be made to define an ethic for Congressmen, 
the third component of the complex, as has been done for the other two units* 
This is a job Congress should do for itself but has refused so far to do. 
Reelection cones most generally to those who can prove they have done most for 
their constituents. This naturally leads some Congressmen to an overriding interest 

"... defe : ■ eta for their dt* rict», but ipparcrliy to .-.} r.-.3ra or less 

interest than that in other federal money spent in their districts* The size 
of the defense budget is the only reason for its preeminent importance. 

If, as President Eisenhower says, "We must never lot tha weight of this 
combination endanger our liberties or democratic processes," then it appears 
that Congress, with its legislative: and investigative powers, has the major 
responsibility for determining the rules and exposing the dangers, if they are 
present, connected with tha growth of the complex* In fact, it also appears 
that there should be no insurmountable difficulty in controlling such a complex* 
Congress has passed innumerable lav.s to control industry* Senator Clifford P. 
Case, Republican of New Jersey, made a very sensible proposal. He recommended 
that a joint Senate-House Coamittee be constituted to review space and defense 


138 


contracts and that all records and communications leading to the award of a 
defense contract be made public. He also suggested that this committee be 
headed by a member of the opposition party—in this case by a Republican. The 
difficulty with this latter suggestion, although it is admittedly feasible, is 
immediately apparent. No Democratic Congress would allow a Republican to get 
the publicity and credit for such a potentially explosive national issue, or vice 
versa. However, if the opposition could find no instance of unwarranted in- 
fluence, then the public could iz .'airly well assured that there was none. 
Further Case said, 

One immediate benefit would be that members of Congress and the Execu- 
tive Branch would be in a totier position to resist pressures from contrac- 
tors who seek political help in obtaining contract awards. . . The knowledge 
that any outside intercession would become publicly known would serve as a 
warning and, I believe, the. strongest possible deterrent to those who would 
seek improper intervention."199 

Secretary McNamara said he was in complete agreement with the objectives 
of maintaining public confidence in the defence procurement process. 
Although this proposal is over a year old, neither the Defense Department, the 
White House, nor Congress has irxde any effort to put any portion of It into 
effect. 

Furthermore, Congress has required appointees to the executive branch to 
get rid of their holdings which might cause conflict of Interest. Charles E. 
Wilson was required to sell all hi* General Motors holdings before the Senate 
would confirm him as Secretary cf Defense in 1953. McNamara relinquished 
options on Ford Motor Company stock and thereby lost $400,000 in profits. 2 * 
No such rules apply to Congressmen* This dual standard prompted the late 
Senator Richard L. Neuberger of Oregon to say. 


'99julius Duscha, "The Disarmament Blues," Harper's Magazine, May 1964, p. 61, 
2 S?LpCo cit. 

''"'Irwin Ross, "Congressmen and Their Conflicting Interests," The Reader's 
Digest, July 1964, p. 121. 


139 


I fear that It has a corroding effect on government generally when 
a men&er of the President's Cabinet can ba ordered to jettison his cor- 


porate portfolio by Senators who themselves may be dabbling in oil, 
futures, television, hotel chains or urar.iuau 202 


cotton 


President Kennedy in his message to Congress concerning the prevent-ion of con- 
flicts of interest on the part of Special Government Employees gives a defini- 
tion of ethical standards of conduct. One of the roost important facets of this 
definition is the prohibition of use of inside information for private gain. 20 ^ 
If this is wrong for special enf-loyaes who work for the government only inter- 
mittently, how much more wrong is t for Senators or Congressmen who have access 
to this type of information on e d y-to~day btsis and whose influence can affect 
the decisions of government on ; $ inttnent b3ris? 

The Defense Department has s.;.d that the surest way for a company to lose 
a contract is for a retired office- to start lobbying for it. 20 '* Defense offi- 
cials resent such pressures but also resent pressures from Congressmen. In the 

halls of Congress, by comparison w;th the Pentagon, vested interest lobbies run 

205 
riot and conflict of interest rides unchecked. " The recent Baker investigation 

has pointed up this problem dramatically* The Senate Committee has turned 

in its report, but even its innocuous recommendations have not been accepted. 20 ^ 

Many Congressmen have made public iheir financial holdings and have recommended 

that this practice be made mandatory or, at least, that a yearly statement be sent 

to the General Accounting Office for its records. While Senator Mansfield and 

Senator Humphrey both favored seme such disclosure, Senator Oirksen said It would 


202 Raymond, op_. cit., p. 218. 

2 °3special Message on ConfSicts of Interests to the Congress of the United 
States, supplied to author by Senator Henry Jcckson, Democrat of Washington. 

204 Katherine Johnsen, "Gates Defends Officers in Industry Against Congres- 
sional Attacks," Aviation Week, July 13, 1959, p. 35. 

20 J"JFK Speech in New Hampshire," New York Times, November 23, 1958, p. **. 

''"""Congress j Fighting To Finish," Newsweek, August 10, 19°^, p. 29. 


\ko 


ir.ake "Class S citizens out of Sectors." 207 Doos this imply that Cabinet Offi- 
cers and other high officials in the Executive Branch are "Class B citizens?" 
This is not a new matter. 0;i id Lawrence,, in a reprint of an erticle he 
wrote during the New Deal, says, 

We favor legislation which will make it a penal offense for any mem- 
ber of Congress to approach e::y person ir. the executive establishment with 
respect to the disbursement ov any public money, or to appear before any 
executive department or conraission on behilf of any constituents or any- 
body else to obtain contracts or agreements for said constituents, or to 
influence the award of any orojects involving the expenditure of public 
funds. 208 

Robert Moses, New York City Park Ccmtiissioner, says that what is needed is 
mental honesty, and his creed Iss 

I shall accept no fevers which will influence my official actions. 
I shall steadfastly avoid cenvusion and conflict of public and private 
business. I shall look to no reward that will reflect upon my conduct 
in office. 

He further states that conspiracy among supposed competitors is more serious 

than conflict of interest between sovernment and business. 2 °9 Of course, Mr. 

Moses is supposedly speaking frca his home state of New York but it appears 

that the same would bo true on e national level— that competing businesses 

probably conspire more than govern..-.snt and business. If this is true, 1* it 

not the responsibility of Congress to adopt proper rules, laws, or regulations 

to prohibit such conduct within the military-industrial complex, if President 

Eisenhower's thesis is accepted that its very weight is endangering the 

individual liberties and democratic processes of the country? That Congress 

has dona nothing to curb the growing influenco of either the military or 

industry in government affairs should be proof that the majority does not agree 

that the problem exists. As far as Congress itself is concerned, it should be 


207 "Ethics in Congress," editorial, New York Times, May 24, 1964, p. 2E. 

208 David Lawrence, "Do Fundamental Principles Really Change?", U. S. News 
and V.'arld Report, January 6, 1964, p. 79. 

^W'Mr. Moses Examines Conflict of Interest," New York Times Magazine, July 
23, 1961, p. 12. 


1A1 


stressed that just because a conflict of interest exists does not mean that it is 
exploited. Temptation and suspicion remain ar. long as Congressmen refuse to 
apply to themselves that which ihcy apply to the members of the executive branch, 
a power which they jealously guird and implenant. 

Laws and rules are not made for the ethically sensitive person, but for 
thosa less perceptive individuals to whom unethical conduct is pursued until 
restrained by legal or other standards. Could it possibly be that obvious 
measures for control of the Congrcsslonal-military-tndustrial complex, which 
will be enumerated in a later chapter, are proposed because they might hamper 
the operations or influence of a majority of Congressmen? 

The final report of the Twenty-Sixth American Assembly states: 

The vigor of the Cong-ess as a legislative body and the effectiveness 
of our constitutional arra nge r.ents require that the Congress warrant and 
command the confidence and rs ;pect of tha electorate. A Congress able and 
equipped to discharge its central functions rationally, expeditiously, and 
with integrity is essentia, to the survival of representative government 
in this country. 2 ' 

One way for Congress to warrant and cotsr ind the confidence and respect of 
the electorate would be to adopt a code of etiiics for its own actions as un- 
compromising and exacting as it e?:pects of tha top appointive eche'ion in the 
executive branch. Being elected to Congress Joes not automatically and 
perpetually clothe a person with the distinction of probity. Democratic govern- 
ment, it is often forgotten, is founded upon the doctrine of responsibility thru 
popular elections. . The elected official shou'id be held responsive to the voters 
if democratic theory is to have practical application. Among other things it 
would be well if Congress exercised a beneficial influence on the iroral tone of 
the country. If the military-industrial complex is endangering the democratic 


210 Report of the Twenty-Sixth American Assembly, Congress and America's 


Future, p. 5. 


11*2 


processes of our country. Congress shares the blame. No one doubts that 
controls are needed In the Industrial -military complex, and that Congress has 
the ability to provide such controls. The main concern at present Is that 
the impartiality and objectivity of Congressional legislation and investigation 
may become clouded by self-interest. Adopting internal rules that would make 
this possible or unlikely would certainly create confidence In its subsequent 
actions. 

A Safeguard In Separation of Powers 

Edward S. Corwin, a great authority on the Constitution, says that one 

of the two great structural principles of the American Constitutional system 

211 

is the doctrine of "Separation of Powers." This principle is held in great 

esteem among scholars of government and cntong our Congressional law makers. 
Separation vis-a-vis concentration Is the theory behind the Sherman Anti-Trust 
Act—keeping one Industry from totting too large or too powerful or opposing 
monopolies in industry and preferring several smaller companies. Separation 
of powers i3 applicable to other areas of government as well, but its effect in 
the CongressionaJ-iiiilitary-indujtfial complex Is of paramount importance. In 
fact, the separation that exists Within Congress, within the three military 
services, and within industry la the most effective present safeguard against 
militarism. This may seem a contradiction because the reader should now be 
convinced that the potential danger of the Congressional -military-.' ndustrial complex 
lies In the inextricability of its components, as Walter Lippmann and Senator 


2 "Edward S. Corwin, The President; Offic.3 and Powers, p. 9. 


1*3 


ht claim, or, as Sc.-.;_tcr Thurmond saycs 

military considerations and economic, political, ar.d 
. .._.- lions are interrelated to such a degree as to make an 
..•>:_-:- - . line between the military and nonmiliiary increasingly 

lisfrtc. — 

It als ■ - r -c- that Congress, rather than controlling the military in 

al Cor^rcssional role of chief antagonist to military budget 

s the chief protagonist for increased military budgets and actively 

-!.~ — .-...ration and approval of the military in advocating these increases. 

. respite th c ;od conditions resulting in closer associations 

>oth national and political self-interests, a few examples should 

that tho oS - -•- of Congressmen by states or districts separates their 

..-■ . i. u..,v i.-Justry is also widely diversified and separated throughout 

vhj Cvur.iry, anJ t:.e cos-ration of tha military into three services rathw than 

... .. fnto a single service is an indispensable safeguard in preventing 

the .;se of the sisplaced power that President Eisenhower warned the nation about. 

i 

Thi . -- ...^.. 'S.tz military is service-oriented rather than unified as to 

ttafy hardware is not hard to show. Under Trisian, the Air 

was ... ascendancy as air power was considered our most valuable military 
. .- . In < : cct the Air Force's position was that Navy carriers were obsolete 
1 that pro* ; liouid go into the Air Force's B-36. This resulted 

-... ... v 1 of t 'all . ■•■ 3 The military argument was purely a service 

an tho Air Force and Navy, but the result was that both the car- 

'.--. and 'J:.~ /- i<e?t in the military arsenal and Admiral Lo^is Confield 

to resign by President Trisan. "Hassive retaliation" was the national 


. Military Cote '.tor Education Report, p. 51. 
- --- ~ 5 _.„ .~__.j ?» 199. 


1V» 


strategy under President Eisenhower. This resulted in the downgrading of the 
Army mission and the upgrading of the Strategic Air Command (SAC) mission under 
the Air Force. Two Army Chiefs of Staff, Ridgway and Taylor, were not reap- 
pointed for a second normal two-year term, but were allowed to retire. Again, 
this was strictly a service argunant. Under President Kennedy, "flexible 
response" became the national strategy, with the result that the Air Force's 
strategic mission has had to give way to the Army's answer to peripheral wars. 
General LeMay has bean disturbed with this result and, at the present time, 
Air Force general officers are the most outspoken against administration 
policy, but it is a service argument on a military question. Air Force generals 
are ably abetted by Senator Gol<?water, a World War II bomber pilot who holds 
a Reserve Major General's co-nmission in SAC. With the Polaris missile and 
nuclear sufcssarinss, the Navy has won back much of its influence in the strategic 
field that was lost to the Air Force immediately after World War II. So we 
find the budget arguments concerned with the number of nuclear submarines, as 
compared to Air Force ICBH's ant! IRBM's and manned bombers, and the Army 
requircT.arts for limited war. 

After national strategy is decided, supposedly by NSC, it is implemented by 
the services. At this time the interests of industry and Congress become appar- 
ent. The recent TFX controversy, which the McClellan Committee has been inves- 
tigating, is the largest defense contract ever let. A bevy of Congressman be- 
ca.r.3 vitally concerned because cf the huge amount of subcontracting to be done. 
Finally all companies were eliminated for the prima contract except Boeing and 
General Dynamics. The JCS recoir-jsr-.ded Boeing but KcNamara, representing the 
administration, changed the decision to Generc.1 Dynamics. His given reason was 
that the General Dynamics plane had more "comrr.anality" as he called it. The 
plane was to be used by both the Navy and the Air Force. The contract award to 


Iks 


General Dynamics was not only a victory for them and a defeat for Boeing, but 
a victory also for the Congressmen of the states of New York and Texas, where 
the largest portion of the work wjis to be dona and a defeat for the Congressmen 

of the states of Washington and Kcnsas, where Boeing's principal plants are 

21 if 

located. The importance of military approval to Congressmen was also highlighted 

in this case. As soon as the JCS stated befo.-e the McClellan Committee that 
either plane was acceptable and that the decision was a difficult one to make, 
the McClellan investigation disappeared from the front page. There seemed to be 
no more argument. 

The air defense mission of the United States is divided between all three 
services. Each service reccmersded its own weapons system for priority 
development and procurensant--thi Navy's Talcs, the Array's Nike Hercules, and 

t he Air Force's Ben-arc. Finally the race narrowed to Bomarc against Nike Her- 

215 
cules. A decision for Nike Hercules would liave been a victory for the Army 

and Western Electric and a decision for Bomarc would have been a victory for 

the Air Force and Douglas. In this case no decision was made for several 

years, with both systems becoming operational, which shows the costliness of plural- 

ism. 

There are many more examples that could be given but in all of them the 
services contended for a mission or a weapons system for their service, the 
Congressmen for work to be done in their district, and, of course, industry 
for the contracts. Contractors are scattered all over the United States, but 
the largest are in California, New York, Michigan, Texas, and Washington; how- 
ever, subcontractors are even more widely dispersed. Congressmen represent every 
state in the union and the military is service-oriented. The Congressional - 
military-industrial complex, viewed as a whole, may appear to be a monolithic 


Julius Duscha, "Arras and the Big Money Men," Harper's Magazine, March 
1961*, p. M. 

215Raymond, o£. cit. « p. 33o. 


146 


giant, but viewed from inside, it is widely diffused and separated. However, 
there are dangers. Congressmen can combine to get contracts and industry can 
allocate sub-contracts to tha districts of influential Congressmen. The size 
of defense contracts allows for unlimited possibilities. Again this diversification 
promotes pluralism, which is costly. Judge Brandeis, talking about the Consti- 
tutional separation of powers, mada a statement which is equally applicable to 
the separation of defense industry among our Congressmen and within the services. 
"The separation of powers was not devised to promote efficiency in government. 
In fact, it was devised to prevent one form of deficiency— absolutism or 
dictatorship." 216 


Joan Coyne McLean, Pros-; ds.it and Congress, p. 46. 


CHAPTER V 

EISENHOWER'S UNSOLVED PROBLEM 

The most influential political position in the world is that of the Presi- 
dent of the United States, The position alone, regardless of the man holding 
this office, brings immense resfec; and prestige. When a sincere and dedi- 
cated man who has given his life to the servici of his country uses this forum 
for a farewell address, it is certain that his words have been chosen with 
utmost care in order to bring tc ; ;e people he has served the distilled wisdom 
of his experience as well as guidance snd hope for the future. In Eisenhower's 
farewell address the President had compelling reasons for what he said. 
Admittedly the speech is general, lacks specifics, and is vague. These quali- 
ties can be considered normal for a speech severly limited in time. However, 
the President's past actions and policies should provide clues and guides for 
the underlying meaning of his words, and clarification and amplification of 
his thoughts and ideas can reasonably be expected to result from the questioning 
of an alert press in interviews. 

Eisenhower Explains— Commentators Evaluate 

The only direct reference Eisenhower has made of the military-industrial 

complex since his farewell address was in writing to the Stennis Subcommittee 

in 1962. He said: 

Moreover, as mentioned in my final aJdress as President, we must 
watchfully mind the military-Industrial complex, for it tends to generate 
powerful economic and political pressures beyond the anticipations even 
of the participants themselves. But thesj are matters of proportion and 
sensible national leadership, requiring tha same kind of continuing over- 
sight and perspective that other major power groupings in our society, 


1i*8 


including business, labor, and governmeni itself reauire in tha interest 
of keeping our system flexible, balanced, and free. 

Tha significance of the speech seems to have changed considerably. From an 
influence that is felt economi cal 5 y, politically, and even spiritually in every 
city, State house, and every office of the Federal Government, he r.ow refers to 
it as a matter of proportion requiring the same oversight as all "major power 
groupings in our society." Perhaps he felt ha had spoken too strongly initially. 
Or perhaps he thought that mention of the dangers in his speech would start 
a dialogue which would be a sufficient response to the problem. If this were 
his motive then he was successfjl. But it is doubtful if Eisenhower expected 
his theory of a military-industrial complex to be exploited by Fulbright, 
Douglas, and writers like Sworaley, Coffin, and Cook, who use his speech as evidence 
of a warfare state, and are generally conceded to be in opposition to his 
political beliefs. His reticence to enlighten the public further could be con- 
sidered political. This is only speculation, but as his remarks are still 
being used by those who would ba expected to quote him in negation rather than 
affirmation, this may have some validity. 

Commentators, analysts, ani ciners have interpreted the speech mostly 
according to their own particular bias. Thoso who believe the military 
establishment is too large and creates an atmosphere conducive to war have used 
the speech as evidence of militarism, or at least of a preoccupation with military 
solutions when others are available. Of course the President didn't indicate 
this. He said the military-ind-istrial compter, was an imperative need and 
represented only a potential danger, not an (actually) present danger. Business 
and industry have generally regarded the speech as unfortunate, and even as an 


^Senate Cold War education He arings , p. 7. 

2 The publications and articles of these writers are all entered in the 
bibliography. 


"undeserving and evil legacy,"^ pointing out that these partners are doing 
a conscientious job of keeping United States military strength at a level 
second to none, which is what America wants and expects* Typical of the 
reasoning of usually knowledgeable political experts in the field is the report 

of the Congressional Quarterly ; 

Revered by the nation as its chief military hero, and respected as its 
Commander-in-Chief, the President was confident of his ability to 'put 
need above pressure-group inducement, before local argument, before every 
kind of any pressure except tlnat that America needs,' as he put it on 
February 11, I960. The st;r : tudced brars of the Pentagon awed him not 
a bitj 'there are too many ge -rals who lave all sorts of ideas, ' he said 
on February 3» I960. Knowing how i;hey 'coerated, ' however, he feared 
that his successor— whether Nixon or Ken: 2dy— would be unable to understand 
their pressures.** 

Undoubtedly the President was cone .-r.ee about pressure from the military-indus- 
trial complex. Certainly he realized that by the time these pressures reached 
the Presidency they had been apj lied in the echelons of government subservient 
to him and in Congress, as well, rle must also have realized that, if the 
pressures were applied to the Presidency which had been unsuccessfully resisted 
in the Defense Department, civilian control was not as effective as it should 
be. But the lack of civilian control is not what concerned Eisenhower. In 1962 
before the Stennis Committee on Military Cold War Education, he reiterated 
strongly that there is no danger of the military usurping unwarranted control. 

It is rather odd for Elsenhower to give a warning regarding a military- 
industrial complex. Whatever success or fame he has achieved is di.-ectly the 
result of his military career. He has always professed a deep respect and trust 
in the military and its leaders. Likewise, he has demonstrated a predilection. 


49 


^Williera J. Coughlin, "Hogvash in Harper's," H- ssiles and Rockits, March 
16, 1964, p. 46. 

4 "The Military Lobby—Its Inpact on Congress, Nation," Congressional 
quarterly, Harch 24, 1961, p. 463. 

'Senate Cold War Education He ".rings, p. 7» 


150 


almost an awe, for the advice ar.d association of business leaders. In the 
selection of his cabinet he shc*od this preference for business roan. With 
Wilson in Defense, Humphreys in Treasury, and Weeks in Commerce, the cabinet 
became known as the "millionaire's club." He appointed innumerable industrial 
leaders to assistant and under-Sccretary positions and even complained that he 
could not entice enough businessmen to enter government. Businessman definitely 
had priority in the Eisenhower administration and he seemed to have complete 
faith in them.' As an example of their early influence, Eisenhower met 30 
times with different business groups during his first eighty days, while Kennedy 

Q 

mot with them only twice during a similar period. Richard Neustadt says, "Moreover 
both (Eisenhower and Trcman) hava iended to put special credence in successful 
products of an idealized career other than their own: military men in Truman's 
case} businessmen in Eisenhower's. '& So for fifteen years, one or the other 
partner in the military-industrial complex had preferential treatment from the 
Chief Executive. Could it be possible that Eisenhower's lifetime association 
with the military and his eight years of close association with business leaders 
gave him an insight into their respective operations that forced him, as a matter 
of conscience perhaps, to warn this country against such a combination? 

During 1959 President Eisenhower had already encouraged national suspicion 
of the military-industrial complex. When asked if he had expressed concern over 
the influence of the "munitions lobby" in the debate over the Army's Nike Hercules 
anti-aircraft missile and the Air Force's Bomarc, Eisenhower appeared annoyed 
that someone had made "those remarks public property" and said he did not recall 
using the term 'Hnunitions makers," but that "obviously political and financial 


^New York Times , December 9, 1952, p. 36. 
JrI chard Neustadt, Presidential Power, p. 176. 
°U. S. News and World Repor t, Hay 1, 1961, p. 68. 

^Ri chard Neustadt, "The Presidency at Mid-Century," law and Contemporary 
Problems, Autumn 1956, p. 634. 


151 


considerations" rather than "strictly military needs" were influencing the 

debate over military weapons.'" At another tirs ho said, "if such forces were 

allowed to prevail, everybody with any sense knows that we are finally going 

to a garrison state."'' 

Huntington says: 

The economic interests o? the industrial concerns— potentially 
the most powerful of the outside groups-«usua11y did not extend to 
major strategic issues. The companies tended to accept the decisions 
on basic strategy and then, w.'thin that framework, compete for contracts 
for their products and servient. It is c'oubtful, for instance, that the 
aircraft industry— more involved with military policy than any other 
industrial complex— influer.ee! the decision on massive retaliation or even 
that it played an important role in determining the size of the Air Force.! 2 

The truth of this statement is rot doubced, but the fact that a reputable polit- 
ical scientist could even consicci- the possibility of industrial influence 
upon strategic political decisis ;.;. is a seriocs indication of incalculable danger 
to the country. The next senter ce by Huntington is the most important one. 
"In the future, the influence oi j;me outside interests in the formulation of 
strategy probably will increase. Between 19^5 and I960, however, their role was 
distinctly peripheral."' 3 

President Eisenhower was deeply committed to peace and disarmament. These 
were his chief goals as President, as they were President Kennedy's and are 
President Johnson's. Eisenhower was disappointed that he was not more successful 
during his two terms in office. Ha was sensitive to what he felt at times were 
counter pressures by the military-industrial complex.'^ Sherman Adams relates 
the following story. 

Eisenhower asked Humphreys if it were not possible for American busi- 
nessmen to make some sacrifices in the interests of world peace. 'No,' 
Humphreys said candidly, 'The American businessman believes in getting as 


■Jjack Raymond, Power at the Pentagon, p. 192. 

| * Congressional Quarterly, op. cit., p. i;63 # 

| ^Samuel P. Huntington, the Cornnon Defence, p. 176. 

' 3 Loc. cit. 

' ^Sherman Adams, First Hand Rooort. p. 458. 


152 


much as he can while the getting is good.' 'Mayberthat's the trouble with 
businessmen, George,' Eisenhower said seriously. 

"Newness" and "Bigness" 

Incidents such as these prcbaoly altered Eisenhower's complete enchantment 
with business leaders. But these incidents are not quoted as factors by Eisen- 
hower. He gives no hint that the military-industrial complex was affecting 
disarmament proposals or strategic decisions, except in offhand re-narks which 
cannot be treated as his considered judgaent. Instead his reasons are that 
the complex is "new" and "big." G.-anted that the military-industrial complex 
is both "nat'and "big," but "newness," and "bigness" of themselves are not 
qualities ini mi cable to the demccrccic processes and liberties of the United 
States. "Newness" and changes ire present in every sector of American life- 
even revolutionary changes. In co.raninicatior.s, space, and medicine, science is 
daily changing our lives. The "mass society" is changing traditional social 
and political concepts. "One iaan-one vote" ar.d civil rights legislation are 
having or going to have profound political, social, and economic effects 
nationally and locally. Emerging and underdeveloped nations are changing inter- 
national relationships and affecting foreign policy. One of the character- 
istics most highly prized of our Constitution and democratic government is the 
flexibility with which it enables our government to meet the crises of a 
changing world. It is the constituent parts of the "newness" and "bigness" that 
must be examined. 

President Eisenhower is correct in statir.g that the military-industrial 
■;ex is new and has brought changes politically, socially, and economically 
in the United States. Again, these changes m:y or may not be detrimental to 


15 Loc. cit. 


153 


democratic processes and liberties* Each one must be examined on its own merits. 
No general statement can be made. The "cold war" itself is new and responsible 
for some of these changes. The different ideologies of Russia and the United 
States would produce changes even if war were not an ever-present danger, because 
of the resulting political incompatibility of the United States and the U.S.S.R. 
Many think that co-existence has eliminated war as an instrument of national 
policy. At least the possibility of war is still the accepted national policy 
and peace through military strength is the dominant theory in our international - 
relations. This has brought the most profound changes in the military, but 
immediately after World War II, it was apparer.t that the military would never 
again be asked to relinquish th(- responsibility that Franklin 0. Roosevelt had 
given them and drop into apparent oblivion. Reorganization of the government, 
resulting in creation of the NSC, provided thct the military would always be 
represented at the highest level cr government policy-making. During wars 
America has turned to the military for leadership but after they were finished, 
as Hills points out, the military has returned to the background in a position 
that was the target of general distrust and ingrained suspicion. 1 ^ This concept 
has radically changed. To return to pro-World War II conditions, in which 
military influence was practically disregarded, is as hopeless and undesirable 
as stopping the new trends of science, industry, and education. Tho military 
now appears to bo in the mainstream of American life. At least the officers' 
corps is no longer drawn mainly from the service schools but predominantly from 
civilian institutions and about 50 percent of regular military officers return 
to civilian universities for advanced degrees, many in the social sciences. The 


16 C. Weight Hills, The PoK:r Elite, p, 7. 


15** 


prestige of the military has grown tremendously, until now when it speaks, even 
on subjects considered politics;, it has the ability to raise the subjects 
above the political level* The military would dispute the fact that it was 
being partisan; and they clothe thoir thoughts in an aura of patriotism and 
impartiality difficult to counteract by those who disagree. Also, they have 
abundant opportunities to speak, not only as witnesses at Congressional hearings 
where what they say is fully reported and often makes headlines, but also, if 
they desire, news reporters wil: attend military press conferences. Retired 
military officers are commentators for national magazines and daily newspapers. 
Here they, for the cost part, loyally support their own service. Military 
speakers are also featured for rationally knc.n professional organizations, at 
fund drives of a patriotic or public spirited nature, as well as at educational 
institutions and many other types of meetings. Their presence is sought after. 
No longer are their public appearances before audiences limited to Independence 
or Memorial Oay. Many would consider this cultural militarism but the consensus 
is that the military represent a broad approach to accepted American ideals. 

Urcnentioned by President Eisenhower, the biggest change in the military- 
industrial complex is political. Security of the United States was undoubtedly 
the major issue of the 196l» campaign. Senator Goldwater employed a task force 
whose membership included two former Chairmen of the JCS, Admiral Arthur Radford 
and General Nathan Twining, and a former Secretary of Defense, Neil McElroy, to 
support, among other issues, his main contention that the President should dele- 
gate the use of nuclear weapons, in certain emergencies, to NATO caamanders. 


'A few of the better knowr retired military commentators are: General Thomas 
D. White, former Chief of Staff, USAF, Newsweek, Major General Max Johnson, 
U. S. News and WorTd Report, Major George Fielding, New York Times, Brig. Gen. 
Thomas Phillips, St. Louis Post Dispatch . There are many other lesser lights. 


155 


President Johnson did not use the military conraanders, but he and Vice-President 
Humphrey exploited to the maximum the weaknesses of Goldwater's position and 
they did freely use Secretary McNarsara. Employment of even the civilian chiefs 
in American politics never had occurred before to such an extent. President 
Eisenhower, commenting on such employment said, "I think that to take the de- 
tails of how you're going to defend the United States and make it a campaign 
issue is quite reprehensible." 15 His remarks could be applied equally to Senator 
Goldwater, Secretary McNamara, cr 'resident Johnson, But the important point 

is that no evidence was produced during the c: r.paign that the military chiefs 

19 
had even given behind-the-scenes support for Goldwater, ' in this or in any 

other of his contentions, except io they had already gone on record before 

Congress. 

But the change in the American political campaign practices is not the 

principal change, as far as the military is concerned. The primary alteration 

is in its relationship with Congress. Congrecs, the former "watchdog" of the 

Treasury as far as military expend ; tures was concerned, has turned its job, in 

the main, over to the executive branch* The President is supposed to control 

the economy and one of the most Important way;, he controls the economy is 

through his annual budget message. Any limitation of military spending must 

come through this document and cannot be left to Congress to reduce it as once 

was possible. Congress, once parsimonious and even antagonistic toward military 

spending, now seeks military assistance to increase such spending. Congressmen 

have always had a close relationship with ind:istry, at least that industry in 

their own states or districts. Likewise, ind;;stry has always worked harmoniously 


^Newsweek, October 19, 1964, pps. 32 and 33. 

'9"The Nuclear Issue," Nemwcak, September 21, 1964, p. 34. 


156 


with the military. In these areas it is not change or "newness" which is impor- 
tant but the second factor mentioned in Eisenhower's criticism—that of "bigness." 

It is true that the military-industrial complex would not present a problem 
if it were not for its size. The interest of Congress can probably be measured 
by the size of military contracts, although Congressmen are interested in 
anything that effects their constituents monetarily. It appears safe to say 
that the bigger a contract is—the more Congressional interest there will be. 
If it means a job to a constituent which produces 100% of his income, or if a 
town is totally dependent upon a defense contract— then size means little; it 
is the percentage of the income for the constituent or locality that is the 
determining factor. Nevertheless^ size or "bigness" is probably the most 
important ingredient of the miHtery-industrial complex. President Eisenhower 
has remarked on this size several times since leaving the government. He 

places emphasis on the deleterious effects of big government, but not similarly 

20 
on those of big business* The Defense Department is by far the largest agency 

in the federal bureaucracy, so Ms statements must apply to it. Still, to 

criticize "bigness" of itself ii r.ot a conclusive argument. Burns and Peltason 

contend that, "bigness" is now a \.ay of life in the United States. "Ours is 

a civilization of big cities, big machines, big labor, big bombs, big government." 2 ' 

A huge Defense Department is necessary because the Communist threat to our 

security is a huge one; it is necessary because U. S. military forces are 

scattered over the entire globe and because the U. S. is a member of defensive 

alliances encircling the iron curtain countries. The job of defense in the United 


Dirlght D. Eisenhower, "Let's Be Honest With Oursolves," Saturday Evening 

Post, October 19, 1963, pps. 23-25, October 26, 1963, pps. 26 and 27. 

^Ijames MacGregor Burns and Jade Walter Peltason, Government by the People , 
p. 8. 


157 


States cannot be done by a small o.-gani zation. 

Walter Lippmann challenges Eisenhower's theory of big government by asserting 
that federal civilian employment, has not grown as fast as the population; that 
state and local employment has doubled since 1947, while nondefense employ- 
ment in federal government is the same percentage; that the share of state and 
local government in the GNP has doubled since 19^8— from 5 to 10%~federal 
revenue as a percentage of GNP has increased only slightly— from 12 to 1<*%; 
that using debt as the measure, local and state debt has increased 382 percent 
while the federal debt has increased only 26%— all this despite the continuation 
of the cold war. 22 These statitti'js show that there is not the steady drift 
toward centralization so feared <nc, if these facts are sufficient, they augment 
the claim that the United State: is not in danger of becoming a militaristic 
state, for one of the tendencies of militarism is centralization. 

Convincing as these figures are, a more important aspect of the problem of 
centralization is the decisionmaking process and the promulgation of regulations. 
Numbers of personnel may decrease, but if the required decisions must go to the 
top for an answer or if all actions are governed by time-consuming regulations, 
then centralization of authority has taken place regardless of the mere number 
of personnel, with a resulting loss of initiative, time, sympathetic consideration, 
as well as awareness of actual details. The more decisions a top-level person 

has to'make, the less he will know about each one. This law, of course, is part 

23 
of Hills' theory— that a few people are making all the important decisions. 

3ut this contention has never been proved because Mills fails to name names and, 

if he could, he probably would have done so. It is impossible in our present 

government to determine who is raking the decision. There is no doubt that 


22 Wa1ter Lippmann, "Ike's Picture of Nation Challenged," Kansas City Times, 
April 15, 1964, p. 22. 

2 3Mills, op. cit., pps. 8, 11. 


158 


goverraient should be kept as small as possible to do the job. "Bigness," regard- 
less of whether it is in government, which includes the military establishment, 
in industry, in unions, or in other institutions, is prone to rigidity and 
complacency, and once a government agency is created, it becomes self-perpetuating. 
On the other hand, the United States has long accepted the theory that business 
must be controlled. As industry grows and becomes more diversified, the more 
government it will take to control it. Government, in, all its functions, must 
increase if its power is to provide the services the people are demanding 
as the United States grows economically and its international interests increase. 
The concentration of power in business monopolies, trade associations, farm 
blocs, or trade unions, to such an extent that any of them can challenge the 
authority of the state is hostile not only to a democracy but also to any form 
of organized society. 

Freedom Lost 

The military-industrial ccmplex does not work as a uniform conscious entityj 
such as unions, farm blocs, AW. Conerican Medical Association). Nevertheless, 
it has unquestioned national influence. There is no doubt that its immense 
power can be used in an unwarranted as well cs a warranted manner. It is also 
evident that the power of the complex is enhcnced greatly by the inclusion of 
political power. Relegation of the complex to the same category as other power 
blocs is debatable, for it seens to have at least one characteristic not common 
to other power blocs. The bases for farm blocs are farmers and politicians from 
rural areas. The same is true for unions and the same can be said for any 
other bloc, but the Congressional-military-industrial complex cuts across all 
power blocs. Its power is felt in the unions, in small cities as well as large, 


159 


in educational institutions, in the economy of the entire nation, and it reaches 
Into practically every home in the country. 

Eisenhower says that this si 1 -pervasive pjwer of the military-industrial 
complex has the potential to encancer our liberties and democratic processes 
and, at other times, he speaks of the erosion of liberties. He has failed to 
mention what liberties are beinr reduced. Individual liberty and freedom, in 
theory at least, are the characteristics of the government of the United States 
most prized by its citizens. Pcli.icians and other orators speak ov these 
liberties and freedoms in a genera" way, but vary rarely become spacific. But 
the fact is that certain of our fr edot.u have disappeared; although they are 
not mentioned in the first ten erne dmertts* or the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and 
Fifteenth amendments of the Constitution, which are usually considered its most 
important portions guaranteeing individual liberties and freedoms. Nor can 
these lost freedoms be attributable to the irtcustrial-military-complex per se 
but they hav3 been lost, totally in some cases and partially in others, because 
of the seme factors which perpetuaie and enlarge the military-industrial complex. 

The draft (officially called by several other names) has been in effect 
since 1940, with the exception of 17 months in 1947 and 1948. Carried on the 
rolls in 1964 were 9% million young men. Of the 1.1 million men reaching age 
26 annually, only 58% have fulfilled or are in the process of fulfilling their 
military obligation. If a young man doesn't enlist after high school, he is 
usual. y not drafted until age 22 or 23 and by then he has usually started a 
civilian career. The services claim inability to fill their officer and 
enlisted requirements of 2% million men without the draft. At present there 
are at least 50 possible variations a young man must consider as he becomes age 
18. The system, as it operates, is not universal nor is it fair. The six-year 


160 


committment in the ready and stcnd:>y reserve is not producing the type of 
units best suited for the theracnuclear age. ' Extensions of the draft at first 
were thoroughly debated in congress and contested, but in 1963 it was extended 
until 1967 by a vote 387 to 3 in the House. No one can contest thai young men 
have lost considerable personal freedom and liberty through the draft. President 
Johnson announced in April 1964, that ha had epproved Department of Defense 
plans for conducting a "very comprehensive study of the draft system and related 
manpower problems." 2 ^ Senator GoldVjater made the draft a campaign issue in 196V 
as Adlai Stevenson did in 1956.'' 

(Jo authentic information has jsen released on the DOD (Department of Defense) 
study, but the rumors to date are that there will be no extensive changes. 2 ' 
Affecting the draft is HcNamara'-s recent annov.ncosant about incorporating the 
Army Reserve units into the National Guard. This action reduces the combined 
Army reserves by 150,000, which should reduce somewhat the Army's need for the 
draft. The big saving, however ; v.ill ba in equipment. The Army has long 
contended that it was uneconomical to have two reserve forces—the National 
Guard and the Army Reserve. As they had direct control over the Reserves, the 
Army has several times tried to reduce the National Guard, but the politically 
powerful National Guard has always prevented this action. Secretary HcNamara's 

plan has taken the other alternative and combined the Reserves with the National 

28 
Guard. The Army, the National Guard, and the Defense Department have hailed 


24 
Charles J. Hitch, Econom ics of Defense in the Nuclear Age , p. 316. 

2 5"Rundcv;n on Draft Versus AH-Voluntccr Military Force," Amy, September 
1964, pps. 18-21. All facts fo;* this paragraph, except as otherwise noted, are 
taken from this article. 

26, 


2 °New York Tfes , September 17, 1964, p„ 28, and September 24, 1964, p. 30. 
2 £Kansas City Star, February 10, 1965, p» 14A. 
28 New York Times, January 17, 1965, p. 12F 


161 


this as a constructive step forward; while the ROA (Reserve Officers' Association) 
has been rather quiet, evidently not being able to find substantive arguments 
to combat the move, but it is expected that this organization will find means 
to alleviate some of the more drastic measures in the directive. 2 ? The only dis- 
senting views have been from Congress: 

Congressman throughout the Nation are seething, mainly, it appears, 
because the Defense Secretary also directed that men in important Govern- 
ment posts such as Congressman (who were not consulted) should not be kept 
in the Ready Reserve.3 u 

The position of the Defense Deperteant is that Secretary McNamara has the 

authority, without going to Congress, to make the reorganization but it can 

almost be guaranteed, whether HcNamtfa is right or wrong on this latter assumption, 

that Congress will find a way to influence this decision before the reorganization 

is complete, particularly as funds to enlarge the National Guard must be 

appropriated, even though the decrease in Reserve forces and their equipment 

will provide an overall saving. Similar reorganizations can be expected in the 

Navy and Air Force reserve structures if the Army reorganization proves 

satisfactory. 

It is a truism that a democratic society, by its very nature, requires an 

informed electorate. Governman: by the people presupposes that the electorate 

has the freedom, if it so desires to use it, to obtain the knowledge to know 

how its government and society operates. All agencies of government are 

responsible to see that the public is kept informed but all three r.embers of the 

Congressional-military-industrial are instrumental in restricting this freedom. 

However, Congressmen have particular responsibility for this freedom as elected 


"ROA has requested former Ohio Governor M. V. DiSalle to release correspon- 
dence between him and President Kennedy in which the latter opposes any National 
Guard-Reserve merger. Journal Memo, The Journal of the Armed Forces, Fe bruary 
6, 1965, p. 4. 

3 0The Conreon Defense ; A Monthly ticttslott;r on our National Security and Peace , 
January 1565. 


162 


officials with broad investigative powers. The press, with its freedom 

guaranteed under the first amendment, is considered by Americans as the agency 

most responsible for keeping the public informed. An 18th century historian 

William Lecky, said; 

Next to the existence of open constituencies, and a fair mode of elec- 
tion, the best security a ration can possess for the fidelity of its repre- 
sentatives is to be found in the system of parliamentary reporting.'' 

Thomas Jefferson said. 

The way to prevent these irregular interpositions of the people is to " 
give them full information of their affairs through the channel of the 
public papers, and to contrive that those papers should penetrate the whole 
mass of the people. The b;si:'. of our government being the opinion of the 
people, the very first object should be to keep that right; and were it 
left to me to decide whether we should have a government without newspapers, 
or newspapers without government, I should not hesitate a moment to prefer 
the latter. 32 

The press cannot perform Its /unction of adequately informing the public 

if its members cannot get acces: to information. James Wiggins, in his book 

Freedom or Security, 33 has listed rany of the difficulties the press is having 

in maintaing this freedom. In this discussion it is assumed that the press 

would perform its function if it ciuld. The problems of a responsible press are 

outside the purview of this thesis,, Classification of material for security 

reasons prohibits the press from presenting many facts to the people. Responsible 

civilian and military officials feel it important to inform the public in broad 

outline and this they do. And often the administration finds it politically 

wise to release material which would otherwise be considered classified. The 

debates in the 196** Presidential campaign between Secretary McNamara and Senator 

Goldwater are a fine example. However, Secretary McNamara would never have 

released much of this material unless he had considered it politically prudent 


31 William Hartpole Lecky, A K i story of England in the Eighteenth Century , 
Vol. 1. p. kk2* ' ' 

.^Julian Boyd, editor, The ?e->ers of Thor as Jefferson, Vol. XI , p. *»9. 

33 James Russell Wiggins, Free dom or Secu.ity, passim. Unless otherwise 
noted, this book provides theTKfK.'laS" USed'i'fnriscussion of the press. 


163 


to counteract Senator Goldwater's charges. There is also a feeling among many 
people that the results of decisions are offered and not the reasons or the 
data behind them. Even in the Goldwater-McNamara debate the decisions had 
already been made and had to be accepted. It would take years for Goldwater to 
reverse the trend toward fewer bombers even if he had been elected President 
in 19&4 and had still decided it mm necessary. 

Undoubtedly many military secrets must be classified. But it Is also true 
that material once shielded recuins so longer than any need for it to be held 
confidential. Any officer or civil servant, except minor clerks, is allowed 
to classify material, to Individ.:;! is reprimanded for too high a classification 
or for classifying material which -hould be ur classified, but he can get into 
serious difficulty for failure to classify. The entire system works toward 
more classification Instead of frear information. Upon retirement, General 
Ridgway submitted his final report as a matter of courtesy to Secretary Wilson, 
Secretary Wilson returned It with the request that it be classified. General 
Ridgway refused to do so, stating that it was all taken from unclassified sources. 

When the tow York Times questioned Wilson on the report, his comment was that 

3*» 
the report wasn't important anyway. Without doubt, the only reason for Wilson's 

request was that the report was critical of the administration and would be 

embarrassing. No one knows how much more of the same type of information is being 

withheld. It is certain that the press would never have ferreted out this 

information if General Ridgway had remained in office and had not been interested 

in presenting his views for conridaration to the public. The material In 

Ridgway's report should have am could have h an debated in the press among the 

informed public for months, CI salification of material is a loss of freedom, 

which although necessary at timt:s, is easily and continually abused. 


3 Matthew Ridgway, Soldier: The Memoirs of Matthew B, Ridgway, pps. 317-321, 


164 


Industry has the same problems. Its work on classified projects must 
be protected. Before personnel can work on these projects, a thorough investi- 
gation, similar to a government security chec:, is made. Anything in an 
employee's past that indicates disloyalty or instability is grounds for loss of 
or failure to get the proper security clearance. This type of security check 
for millions of government employees is accepted, as to work for the government 
is a privilege and not a right. For industrial employees it may mean loss of 
a job and certainly restricts the freedom of many individuals who may have been" 
unwise once. Also this security restricts the free flow of scientific information, 
which may have overall serious rej ^rcussions. Limiting scientific information 
to a restricted circle puts fewer rinds to work on various problems and can easily 
have the effect of slowing the entire scientific output of the nation. An even 
more limiting effect of this system ha:; been > sal i zed. Industry has found a 
serious problem in restricting classified, information to people who have the 
required security clearance. To . ;ke r.atters easier, they have found it neces- 
sary to classify at least 25,000 entire plants or enclaves and to have security 
clearance for all individuals working in thes- plants, including the lowliest 
janitor. Whether necessary or unnecessary, freedom of many Americans has been 
reduced. 

Secrecy breeds secrecy. It has long been a growing problem for the press 
to get proper access to Congressional operations. Congressional Quarterly ran 
a survey in 1954 of committee sessions, excluding meetings held during recess, 
meetings held outside Washington, meetings of conference committees, meetings 
of the House Rules Committee called to grant rules for consideration of bills, 
and meetings of the House Appropriations Committee and subcommittees of which 
no record is kept. Of the 1,413 Senate coaraittee meetings, 546 or 39% were 


^Raymond, ep_. cit., p. 154. 


165 


secret and 867 were open. Of tiie 121 joint ca-mrittee meetings, 70, or 58 
percent were dosed and 51 were open. Of l,4i8 House committee meetings, 627, 
or 43% were closed and 841 were open. It Is interesting that the House Armed 
Services Committee, which might be expected to meet most often behind closed 
doors for security reasons, was y-% secret cc spared to House Education and Labor, 
which was 92% secret. Many comnitteos held a greater percentage of secret 
meetings than the Armed Services Committee. This raises the quest-ion as to 
whether security or convenience c members it more important as far as secret 
committee meetings is concerned;, Regardless, secret committee meetings restrict 
the right of the public to know how the government operates. In many states 
this penchant for legislative secret meetings is on a par with that found in the 
national government and has even ieen adapted by city and county commissioners 
in some cases. 3° 

For a country that wishes to protect itself, the knowledge of potential or 
actual enemies is as indispensibla as the presence of armed forces. In fact, 
current End reliable intelligence is a vital ingredient to adequate military 
planning. One of the objectives of the United States is world peace and, to 
further this objective, governr.ienis among the emergent and backward nations must 
not be inimicable to our ideas,, intelligence about the operation of these gov- 
ernments can be gathered only by a secret intelligence force. While not an 
immediate part of the military-industrial complex, the CIA (Central Intelligence 
Agency) is also partially a result of world conditions and is closely knit to 
the military as far as intelligence estimate.; are concerned. In the book, 
"ha Invisible Government, by Duvid Wise and Thomas B. Ross, the activities of 
the CIA are outlined. Whether this book is vactual in all details is not known, 
nor is it important to this discussion. What is important is that CIA controls 


36wiggins, op_. cit. , pps. 12-15. 


166 


a whole area of government policy that is never discussed until long after that 

policy has taken effect. This secrecy has been accepted as necessary in the 

world today, but it is also an area in which unwarranted influence and misplaced 

power can surely arise. The bock begins: 

There are two governments in the United States today. Ona is visible. 
The other is invisible. The first is the government that citizens read 
about in their civics books. The second is the interlocking, hidden mach- 
inery that carries out the policies of the United States in the Cold War. 

This second invisible government gathers intelligence, conducts espion- 
age, and plans and executes secret operations all over the globe. 

The Invisible Government is not a formal body. It is a loose, amor- 
phous grouping of individuals and agencies drawn from many parts of the 
visible government. It is not limited to the Central Intelligence Agency, 
although the CIA is at its heart. Nor is it confined to the nine other 
agencies which comprise what It known as the intelligence community: 
The National Security Council, the Defense Intelligence Agency, The 
National Security Agency, Army Intelligence, Navy Intelligence, Air Force 
Intelligence, The State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and 
Research, The Atomic Energy Commission and The Federal Bureau of Investigation. 

The Invisible Government includes, also, many other units and agencies, 
as well as individuals, that appear outwardly to be a normal part of the 
conventional government. It even encompasses business firms and institu- 
tions seemingly private. 

To an extent that is only beginning to be perceived, this shadow 
goverrarant is shaping the lives of 190,000,000 Americans. Major decisions 
involving peace or war are ta.'dng place cut of public view. An informed 
citizen might come to susptct that the foreign policy of the United 
States often works publicly in one direction and secretly through the 
Invisible Government in just -he opposite direction.37 

The most important areas in which individual freedom has been iost has been 

clsc^sed by Walter Millis, in his book Indivir ial Freedom and the Canyon Defense. 

in which he says there are "three areas of concern": (1) obligatory military 

service and other features of the present system of military manpower utilizations 

(2) the many recent measures directed toward the control or extirpation of 


''David Wise and Thomas B. Ross, The Invisible Government, pps. 3 and 4. 


167 

\ 

sedition and subversive belief; (3) the increasingly stringent measures directed 
toward the control of espionage^, the protection of government secrets, the 
gathering of intelligence* and the development of counter-intelligence operations. 

Spending 

The obvious way to reduce the influence of the military-industrial complex 

would seen to be to reduce the military budget. President Johnson has made it 

clear that he believes it possible to hold down these expenditures and thereby 

make more money available for the socio-economic benefits of a "Great Society." 

He said: 

As I have stated— and as our enemies well know—this country now pos- 
sesses a range of credible, usable military power enabling us to deal with 
every form of military challenge from guerrilla terrorism to thermonuclear 

... \ 

Barring a significant shift in the international situation, we are 
not likely to require further increments on so large a scale during the 
next several years. 

Expenditures for defense will thus constitute a declining portion of 
our expanding annua! Gross National Product, which is now growing at the 
rate of five per cent each year. 

If, over the next sevaral years, we continue to spend approximately 
the sania amount of dollars annually for our national defense that we are 
spending today, an ever-larger share of our expanding national wealth will 
be free to meet other vital needs, both public and private.- 1 ? 

There is no doubt that any cut in the defense budget must come from 

Secretary McNamara through the leadership of President Johnson. Congress will 

investigate for waste and poor management, particularly from evidence supplied 

by GAO {General Accounting Office) but real economies must derive from the 

executive branch. During Eisenhower's 8 year; in office, the defease budget was 


38 
Walter Millis, Individual Freedom and the Conmon Defense, p., 12. 

39n S vid Lawrence, "Can We fake Chances On Survival?", U. S. »cws and World 

Report , February 1, 1965, p. 104. 


168 


always over half the national budget and around IK of the GNP. During the 

Kennedy administration it remair.ed about the eame as far as percentage of the 

national budget and GNP are concerned. As the GNP increased, so did the national 

budget and the defense budget, resulting in a! out $6 billion raore for defense 

under Kennedy. The defense budget has had it::, ups and downs since World War II, 

but generally the trend has been upward. Even under a rising defense budget, 

industrialists have criticized cancellation of any defense project. McNamara 

has cancelled several, but the post recent was Pluto (low-altitude supersonic 

vehicle). Typical of industry 1 :- view iss 

The cancellation, With its undertones of unilateral non-armament, 
is of a broader significance than the program itself. If we continue to 
appease the Soviet Union b/ vailing to carry out research and development 
in promising areas, than 1 : Bust be asked whether there is, in fact, a 
bright future for defense Firms'* • • • 

Industries have concentrated on military research and development which, 
they claim, is strangled by the concept which dsmands fulfillment of requirements 
and missions as grounds for substantial expenditures. Hanson Baldwin points 
out that invention has never followed this path and the machine gun and tank 
would still remain blueprint dream* had their development awaited the specifications 
of a clear-cut military requirement.** 2 It is known that the JCS voted unani- 
mously to include production money in the FY (fiscal year) 66 budget for Nike 
X, the anti-missile missile.'* 3 Tha country that makes a breakthrough in this 
field will have a clear-cut superiority for a while, but Secretary McNamara has 
insisted that systems tests be performed before any production decision is made. 

Most of the criticism of the defense budget has come from the civilian 
sector. But General Thomas S. Power! USAF, former Chief of SAC, who recently 


^tlHaM J. Coughlln, "Two Minds," Missiles and Rockets, July 20, 1964, p. 46, 

^'uilHam J. Coughlin, "The Price of the Future," Missiles and Rockets, 
November 16, 1964, p. 46. 

^Hanson W. Baldwin, "Slow Down In The Pentagon," Foreign Affairs, January 
1965, p. 264. 

^"The Countdown," Missiles and Rockets, January 25, 1965, p. 7. 


169 

retired and wrote a book which was suppressed by the Pentagon, while he was 

on active duty gave an interview in which he discussed the dangers of disarmament^ 

U. S. Hews and World Report said that military men, (it did not narae them), were 

worried about cutbacks and listed the following actions as leading toward 

disarmament when other countries were not disarming: (I) scrapping the last 

225 B-47 nuclear bombers, (2) d activating 3 squadrons of B-52 long-range bombers, 

(3) curtailing or closing 95 military bases, (4) reducing Army and Air Force by 

58,000 men, (5) considering end;.-.;, the military draft, (6) cancelling plans for' 

200 more Minuteman missiles, (7) vetoing Army plans for Nike X missile, and (8) 

refusing to authorize any new major surface warships. Of course, defense and 

space industry is fearful of improvement in relations with Russia, as it removes 

the urgency from their program.^ 6 Industrialists cite arguments as "even more 

dangerous" that match the position taken by Stewart Alsop, who stated that the 

revolution in weaponry is now almost ccrcpleteo'* 7 They also misuse the arguments 

of economists like J. R. Livingston, who firmly believes that military programs 

should not be kept in operation just for the cake of the economy and who says: 

All of these things (closing of military bases, cutbacks In military 
programs) will create pockets of unemployment. If the administration 
doesn't modulate this program it ould result in a flattening out of the 
rate of growth, and if handled badly it could even cause a recission~ 
but I don't think this is going to happen.** 

This is a reasonable statement but industrialists and politicians point to 

California, which has 23% of the offense business and 50% of the space business 

but also has San Diego, which is hard hit by unemployment due to a falling level 


44 

"A 'Sure Way" To Prevent Nuclear War" - Interview with Gen. Thomas S. 
Power, USAF (Ret.) - U. S. News and World Rs p.-rt. January 25, 1965, p. 72. 

**?"Why Military Men Worry About Cutbacks " U. S. News an d World Report, 
January 25, I965, p* 73. ~ * 

/^William J. Coughlin, "The Bear Trap," M' ssiles and Rockets. Kay 18, 1964, p. '(6. 

^'William J. Coughlin, "Withdrawal FronTi;eallty," Missiles and Rockets, 
June 15, 1964, p. 46. 

'""Sees Peril In Military Cuts," Kansas City Times, December 7, 1964, p. 3. 


170 

of new government business.** 5 Ttey expect the government to correct this but 
not by reconversion or by movin-j business from a locality that does not have unem- 
ployment to one that has unemployment. As far as industry is concerned, the 
Economic Conversion Commission proposed by Senator McGovern is totally 
unnecessary. 

This would result in further government interference in private 
industry. The widespread talk about the necessity of converting this 
industry to commercial business is just so much pap* There will, of 
course, be shifts in the space and defence markets. But federal spending 
with this industry will reisain high, regcrdless of the outcome of the - 
November election, Those firms competent enough to keep up with chances 
in the market will have no trouble surviving.*" cnanges 

The FY 1966 budget, with $i>9 billion for defense and $24 billion for new 

contracts seemed to allay the fears of industrialists. Nevertheless, they gave 

warning that this budget was "seen as a floor from which defense spending 

inevitably must rise to some degree—not as a ceiling from which it will decline." 5 ' 

And William C. El let, Director of Market Analysis for Northrop Corporations, 

said: "I concur the defense budgets of the future may decline, but there is a 

finite point below which they will not fall.'' 52 The conclusion to be drawn from 

these illustrations is that defense industry will apply every pressure possible 

to maintain the present level of defense spending. A decrease in defense spending 

will not decrease the influence of the Congressional -mi litary-industrial complex. 

It will increase it because more Congressman and industrialists will be struggling 

for what they think is their rightful slice of a smaller pie. The military will 


i»» i Wi i'alr °* , Cou 9 hHn ' "Survival Of The Fittest,'' Missiles and Rockets. 

June 29, 1964, p. 46. * 

|°Loc. cit. 

8, 1965 " 65 J * C0U£,h,fn * " 0nW3rd and Upward," Missiles and Rock e ::s f February 
5 2 Loc. cit. 


171 


probably not outwardly support the industrialists except in official Congressional 
testimony, but it will, from dedicated intere. t in its concept of national 
security, provide the facts and basis for industry and Congress in their 
attempts to influence and perhaps change decisions. A declining defense budget 
will be more serious from the viewpoint of mi.placed power and unwarranted 
influence than will an increasing defense budret unless defense industry has 
already been absorbed into other , irsuits. Increased defense spending is 
reinforced by thoughtful scholars juch as Herman Kahn who thinks the present 
defense budget is far too small, He claims that World War III is well on the 
way and we should be expending rior.^y for civilian defense structures, anti- 
missile defense, mere ballistic Missiles, and a larger strategic air command. 
Further he thinks that the defense budget of the past few years has been below 
the minimum required for security and has only been kept alive by the Korean 
War, Hungarian insurrection, Suez and Berlin crises. Without these stimulants 

the United States would in all probability already have become a secondary 

53 
power. Specifically Kahn is of the school that rejects a single, simple 

strategy which is the most econraii ca 1 . He says: 

No satisfactory solution to all the problems can be found by relying 
on a single simple strategy; the richness and variety of the possible 
challenges create a requirement for multiple and flexible capabilities. 
One hopes the acquisition of adequate limited war capabilities and pre- 
attack mobilization bases will mitigate the conflicting demands to a point 
where whatever problems regain can be handled by some combination of general 
war capabilities, unilateral and multilateral arms control measures, and 
various regional and international arrangements.^ 

The two solutions of limited war and preattack mobilization bases that he en- 
visions would greatly increase the defense budget, which increase he claims 


^Herman Kahn, On Thermonuclear War , p. 536. 
Stjbid., p. 53 U 


172 


America can and must accept if it wishes to survive. 

Another point of view is being presented by columnists and trade magazines 
on the civilian portion of the defense establishment. This takes multiple forms 
but mainly exploits the differences existing between the military and civilian 
sectors of the Defense Department and between the civilians in the Defense 
Department and in Congress. Both these groups are naturally antagonistic. 
Congress is always looking for msans to increase its prestige and authority 
vis-a-vis the executive branch. Relations between the legislative and executive' 
branches vary from active to reluctant cooperation to outright and direct 
opposition. The diverse interests of Congress make it impossible for a Defense 
Secretary to please the entire Congress. The best he can hope for is a 
consensus to support him. McNassara initially enjoyed approval of a high percentage 
of Congressmen, but this approval has decreased with the length of time he has 
been in office and this is nonr.sl. As far as the military and civilian sectors 
of the defense establishment arc concerned, the degree to which both see "eye 
to eye" on all key issues can be used as a measurement of how well the civilians 
are performing their job. If ail three services, with their separate interests, 
support the civilian hierarchy v.ithout question, then the civilian organization 
is undoubtedly not fulfilling ii:s mission. Conversely if all .three services are 
at odds with the civilian heads ; . then there ii something wrong also. Controversy 
is essential to successful control » In no other way can Army, Navy, and Air 
Force dereands be arbitrated. 

Korris Janowicz in his revealing and persuasive book, The Professional Soldier^ 
says that, continuously since the end of World War II, both the legislative and 
executive branches have sought to strengthen the political control of the armed 


"a11 factual material for this paragraph, except as otherwise noted, is 
taken from Morris Janowicz, The Professional Soldier , pps. 3^7-3^9. 


173 


forces. This has been accomplished in the executive branch by the .hsc and by 
enlargement of the President's personal staff and in Congress by increasing the 
number of committees and, particularly, by increasing the number of committees 
dealing with defense. Janowicz a1..o points out that civilian control has been 
oriented toward administration rather than toward policy. But this is a field 
in which the military are recogivz^d experts. Also the military itaelf has 
been more interested in management than in po'.itics and, as a pressure group, it 
"is not a voluntary organizatic. ctfng on ti 3 organs of government; on the 
contrary, it is an organ of govern lent, seekir.g to develop new techniques for 
intervening in domestic politic:." 56 The military approaches Congress as an 
object of public relations, except for a few key individual Congressmen. This 
description of the military is apt. Tha reorganization of the Department of 
Defense in 1958—59 had the cumulative effect of producing greater organizational 
balance between military and civilian administrators.^? However, commentators 
looking for areas of disagreement between Congress and the military and between 
the civilian defense officials snd the men in uniform highlight any frictions that 
appear which are apparent and give (as to the individuals concerned) the press 
considerable room for personal interpretation. 

Secretary McNaaara was hailed by industry as a fine choice when he was 
selected by President Kennedy but greeted with less enthusiasm by the military, 
who were less sure of his management techniques, cost effectiveness programs, 
unified procurement in selected aroas, and other financial reforms. 3 McNamara's 
success within these areas, his forceful presentation of ideas to Congress and 
his support by President Kennedy increased military concern and, when he moved 


5°Janowicz, od_. cit., p. 369. 

57Lawrence Radway, "Uniforms and Muftis What Place In Policy?", Public 
Administration Review, I958, p. 182. 

5°wflliam J. Coughlin, "The Revolution: Part II," Missi les and Rockets, 
April 6, 1964, p. 54. 


174 


into technical areas, even cancelling some "pet" military projects, the industri- 
alists started to explit what they called "military dissatisfaction" to attack 
McNair.ara, without quoting or naming military r..an but using the indefinite term 
of "sc.T.e military man" (or a similar expression). One of the less subtle, but 
typical, consents is: 

Defer.se Secretary McN:nara was a good man in his time and place* He 
has now outlived his usefulness. He can't project himself and the Depart- 
ment of Defense into the future. He has no vision. Unless thare is a 
change, the country will be in trouble in a few years. 59 

John J. McCloy says that usurpation of authority by civilians is much 
more dangerous than usurpation by ;he military. John C. Ries has written an 
entire book the thesis of which is that the Secretary of Defense has built up 
an all-powerful apes 'of civilians who have ci plicated and supplanted the men 
in uniform which has all the devecis of the Army system discarded by Secretary 
Root 60 years ago. Hanson W. Bsi'id ;in, who is often critical of the man in uniform, •. 
criticizes McNaraara for consolidation at the Lefense level in creeling new agencies 
such as the Defense Supply Agency, Defense Cor; mini cations Agency, Defense Intel- 
ligence Agency and Defense Atonic Support Ager.cy, He points out that the 15 
Presidential appointees in rank of Assistant Secretary of Defense In 1961 have 

been increased to 16 and the Deputy Assistant Secretaries of Defer.3 j have been 

62 

increased from 11 to 30. Anoti er article st> tes that Secretary Kc.iamara has 

asked Congress to increase the Joint Staff which ha controls from 00 to 800 and, 
now that he has military chiefs whom ho has appointed and who are his type of men, 
that he is trying to increase their tour from 2 to 4 years. * Janowicz quotes 


5 °Wi!licTi J. Coughlin, "Alice in McNamarcland," Missiles and R ockets. August 
3, 1964, p. 46. 

°°Su;-ns and Peltacon, og. eft., p. 606. 

"'John C. Ries, The Hanacser-.ani of Defense, Baltimore, The Johns Hopkins 
Press, 1964. 

° 2 Hanson W. Baldwin, "Slow Down in the Pentagon," Foreign Affairs , January, 
1965, P. 271. 

oj'Tour Year Tour For Service Chiefs?", The Journal of the Armed Forces, 
January 23, 1965, pps. 1 and 5. 


175 


General Taylor saying that as Army Chief of Staff, he had 19 layers between him 

and the President. In another field McWamara is accused of classifying reports 

that he does not want publicized, such as "The Howze Report on Army Mobility," 

"Disoway Report on the Air Force," and "Project Forecast," which looks to changes 

in the 1970's, as security material, and he is charged with the "muzzling" of 

other subjects such as the Naval problem of nuclear propulsion and future ship 

construction.? Time summarize:: both sides of the question as follows: 

To some outsiders, particularly on Capitol Hill, McNamara's dominance 
over the JCS seems a cans ; for concern,. Where once they worried that the 
JCS might become so powerful to be a sort of 'Prussian General Staff, 1 
they now fret lest the Chiefs become too subservient to the civilians. 
But the fact remains that ur.der McNamara the nations military power has 
grown as never before— wvih less waste of money and with less energy 
expended in futile interservice and military-civilian fights. McNamara's 
new team of military managers seem likeiy to flourish in that fashion.^o 

Summary 

Eisenhower's recommendationi for control of the military-industrial complex 
were principally: (1) that "in the councils of government, we (supposedly 
includes the citizenry of the nation) must guard against the acquisition of 
unwarranted influence" and (2) "only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can 
compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defensej 
Certainly it can be agreed that the President presented a timely warning. But 
he did not give a hint as to how the citizenry must guard against the acquisition 
of unwarranted influence nor did he tell how the citizenry could become 
knowledgeable so that they could compel the proper meshing of industry and the 
military. A few of the subjects that would have to be understood to make one 


^Janovjicz, op . cit. , p. 3^7. 

°5>'Congress Can Remove Th2 Muzzle," The Journal of the Armed Forces. 
January 2, 19°5, pps. 1 and 8. 

6 5 Time , February 5, 1965, P- 23A. 


176 


knowledgeable on the military po.-tion of the complex are the training, armament, 
status of alert forces, gaps in the warning networks, range of bombers, reliability 
of missiles, atomic stockpiles, hardening of sites, dispersal and concealment 
of military facilities of United States forces, as well as those of our allies. 

Experts of all countries are continually evaluating and reevaluating their 
own strengths as well as those of their allies, and for that matter, those of 
all other countries. These complex interpretations require highly skilled 
personnel, computers and, after the estimates are made, there is rarely real 
agreement. In the United States t:>.e Army, Navy, and Air Force, Defense 
Intelligence Agency and CIA all ma :e separate evaluations and never accept each 
other's estimates. Tne estirv atn controversial and disparate. These 
separate estimates not only support the viewpoint of the service, but are 
among the most carefully guarded sacrets of this country as well as our allies. 

Decisions on weapons systeris raade today, taking into consideration lead 
time for equipment such as submari nes, planes and missiles, will affect the 
military establishment for at least a decade. A scientific breakthrough, 
such as the atomic bomb, gives a country whicii has the production capacity, 
wealth, and determination to react to such a breakthrough, a decided advantage. 
The country that first possesse: cri anti -ballistic missile capable of defending 
its cities will have a military superiority that could be decisive for years. 
The fate of our nation rests on these decisions, but the decisions can be made 
only by the President and his appointed officials. Even Congressmen, with 
their undoubted knowledga, skill, and experts to advise them, can only insist 
that America remain superior in all fields. Despite Eisenhower's admonition, 
these decisions are taken for granted by the citizenry of the United States. 


177 

Ernest A. Englebert says: 

For political scientists it raises the broad question of the possible 
alternatives to open and uninhibited public decision-making when the issues 
are so complex and clothed in security that intelligent and public debate 
is not possible. °7 

The principal alternative presented is for political scientists to gain 
a sufficient knowledge of science :o be able to understand the positions taken 
by scientists in national politics.:, If it is necessary for political scientists 
to become scientists in order to intelligently debate questions of national 
importance, it is also important to recognize that the general public must 
have the same ability if they are to understand the issues at stake. 

The fact that the American puolic demands the security of absolute superior- 
ity in all weapons systems and in any type of war (land, sea, or air) in this 
thermonuclear age, and the fact that politicians know their statements cannot 
be disputed without the release of classified material, makes defense a subject 
that can be exploited. The Republicans tried to do this in 1964, and Eisenhower 
did it in 1952. Kennedy did it in I960 and a recent article called this a 
military myth which sparked a costly arms race. 68 All these statements were 
partisan and overdrawn and while there is no statistical proof, the American 
citizens seem to accept the Statements of our defense posture according to their 
individual political beliefs. A R .publican naturally has faith in what the 
Republican national leaders are saying and, likewise, a Democrat believes his 
party's national leaders. If this were not so, there seems no logical explanation 
for the fact that the Democrats in I960 were saying that the Eisenhower 
administration had produced the "missile gap"^9 anc | had not prepared the United 
States for limited wars, and four years later Senator Goldwater claimed that 


^Robert Gilpen, American Scientists and Nuclear Weapons Policy, as reviewed 
by Ernest A. Englebert, American Political Science Review , Vol. 57, June 1963, 

°°"The 'Missile Gap' - 1 - Military Myth Sparked Costly Arms Race," Kansas 
City Star, Associated Press Dispatch, January 26, 1965, pps. 1 and 6. 

°9Senator Stuart Symington, (3-Ho.) popularized the term "missile gap" during 
Eisenhower's second administration but it was used by Democrats, including President 


Kennedy, during the I960 Presidential Campaign. 


178 


the Kennedy administration had allowed American defense to deteriorate from its 
strong position under Eisenhower. Defense decisions, as far as they affect 
complex, are aired politically end not factually. This does not main that the 
actions in Vietnam or the Congo may not get factual interpretation in the press, 
but the portion of the military involved in t'r.e complex is more oft^n shrouded 
in secrecy as far as the public It concerned. 

Still there is a wide area in the classified, definitive decisions on the 
details of the defense posture end in t;vo rr.ati rial released occasionally by 
the administration to reassure the American j. blic, from which the American 
citizen can beccv-se batter infer. . Tlii Army has proposed a new Air Assault 
Division in which halicopters replace a great many vehicles; some of these 
helicopters cost: as much as a B-k'/, or $3 million each. Should the Army procure, 
maintain,, and operate the incre..-e.j airplanes and helicopters or should this 
mission be given to the Air Force? General LcMay claims that the Army proposed 
a duplication of the research and development and the supply installations 
necessary to maintain and operate these aircraft and that this task could be 
ccce^pliched more cheaply by existing Air Force installations.' But does a 
democratic government want this unification of responsibilities or does it need 
existing pluralism in order to fester competition and separation? Or will the 
Air Force give the priority to this job that the Army desi res— there is proof, 
according to the Army, that the Air Force has always given development and 
procurement of planes for Army use last priority. Examples such as this could 
be duplicated many times. Also thare are problems of maintenance costs, modern- 
ization, as well as operations, and may others which Charles J. Hitch discusses 


^ A ir Force Information Policy Letter for Commanders , Number 130 , United 
States Air Force, April 196^, p. 2^T, 


179 


in his book, Economics of Defense in the Nuclear Age . The subject is exceptionally 
complicated, but there is no doubt the public <ou1d become more knowledgeable about 
the defense budget. Probably the area which shows the most promise for public 
enlightenment would be a law which would open all negotiations on difense 
contracts to the public. 

Although the President has railed to propose a remedy for a changing 
condition (cold war and resultir j uilitary-inc.'ustrial complex) in American society, 
he has also failed to show areas o," personal freedom already eroded by this changing 
condition, as indicated by Walter Hillis. The most important omission by the 
President is that any increased involvement in defense matters by the citizenry 
is contingent upon more information from a reliable source which will tend 
to remove defense questions from partisan politics. This not only increases 
the part to be played by a responsible press end educational institutions but 
changes must be made in Congressional operations. In both his farewell address 
and his letter to Senator Stennii Eisenhower stressed another idea. In the 
former he warned against unwarranted influenct, sought or unsought, and in the 
latter he said the complex generated polities', and economic pressures beyond the 
anticipations of the participant;* The problem remains: how to guard against 
an unsought, unwarranted influerce that is serf -generating. 


CHAPTER VI 

A PROPOSAL 

A synopsis of the problem follows: (1) the prolonged existence of 
the cold war, which shows no signs of abatement (coexistance with Russia 
intensifies conflict with Red CI ina), presents the United States and her 
allies with the continued thr of instant, thermonuclear war from the 
U.S.S.R.j (2) unsettled condi ;icns throughout the world require the U. S. 
to be prepared for any type o i _r practically any place on the globe; 
(3) to maintain a certain degree of readineas to oppose these multiple threats, 
the United States retains a huge military establishment including armed forces, 
conscription to provide personnel, a sizable arsenal, stockpiling of critical 
materials, and expanding research and development in all types of military 
equipment and in all areas of military endeavor; (k) the American people 
believe that world security is the overriding single problem in the world 
today and accept and support the theory of "peace through strength" in all 
areas of research and development and in all types of possible warfare on land, 
sea, or fn the air; (5) this huge military establishment requires an industrial 
base to support it and creates the danger of misplaced power and unwarranted 
influence particularly because Congress has a vested interest in the continuance 
of the military-industrial complex, (6) misplaced power and unwarranted influence 
increase due to the motivation of industry for profits and Congressmen for 
re-election; (7) the military's dedication to civilian control and democratic 
institutions protect the national interests while military men are in uniform; 
however, there is no proof that this dedication will operate when the military 
man enters industry for a second career; (8) geographical dispersal of 


181 


Congressional districts, as well es the diversification and distribution of 
industry, provides safeguards aiainst misplaced power and unwarranted influence 
by offsetting concentration to a degree; (9) there has been erosion of liberties 
and freedoms due to the cold wa •; (10) unwarranted influence and misplaced 
power may increase or the national economy ma/ be adversely affected under a 
declining military budget (unless adequate prior plans for reconversion of 
defense industry or other public spending are introduced; (11) the major 
difficulty to be solved is that the Congressional-military-industrial generates 
unanticipated pressures inimical to the best interests of the country; (12) 
the ultimate solution to this problem must be a more informed electorate, but 
the press is handicapped in providing continuity and completeness of 
information because of security c .ssi. ; ic^tio i, other inherent complexities in 
bureaucratic government, and a tral tendency for both Congress and the 
executive establishment- to avo: jrspnally embarrassing or politically 
detrimental facts from reaching ere public; (13) only Congress and the executive 
branch Ci.n provide the solution to the problem. 

Individual Liberty 

There are many reasons why the national government does not keep the 
electorate completely informed. These reasons intertwine but can be generally 
grouped under two headings. First, all three of the coordinate breaches of the 
national government feel that tUey have a paramount interest in protecting 
individual liberties and freedca;; each branch is jealous of its own prerogatives, 
particularly Congress snd the executive branc; the result, at best, is a lack 
of cohesion. Each branch can point to the other as the negligent agency with 
its own actions being accepted as best for the country. Second, there is no 
general consensus as to exactly what freedom and liberty mean. Above all 


182 


freedom or liberty is a personal matter; loss of liberty for one person or 
agency may be a gain for another individual or group of individuals. Freedom 
must be constantly reevaluated in its overall effects and, as the United States 
is changing politically, socially and economically, the concepts of freedom and 
liberty need redefining. At best it is a nebulous subject not to be controlled 
by a single Act of Congress; instead its loss is by creeping erosion, and it 
must be considered in every Act o," Congress, as well as in executive: directives 
and the daily actions within th cut've branch. 

Without giving reasons,, Americans speak cf freedom and liberty as sacred 
concepts and political virtues jociliarly American. The Revolutionary War was 
fought for freedom. The debate which started on these subjects before 1776 is 
still going on. Thomas Jefferson accused the Federalists of despotic behavior 
and a desire to destroy the newly-won liberties. It wss the theme of William 
Jennings Bryan at the turn of the century and of Barry Goldwater in the 19b4 
Presidential campaign. To document politicians, use of this theme would be 
almost endless. But always the party out of power accuses the party in power 
of destroying individual freedom and liberty. The Constitution, the guardian 
Of these liberties, also is sacred. Although it has been interpreted and rein- 
terpreted, any politician can bring cheers frc.-n his cohorts by saying it is 
being misinterpreted. Actual amendments are remarkably few but, nonetheless, 
the Constitution has undergone ; radical chanre in meaning. Madison, the 
first great interpreter of the Constitution, cid not believe in an interpersonal 
relationship; his theory was ba: ad on achieving group equilibriums. The modern 
theory of liberty, evolving gradually over many years, differs greatly. It is 
concerned with the status of the individual, an individual who is part of a 
great society which is being changed by bureaucracy, urbanization, industriali- 
zation, technology, and the cold war. 


133 


John P. Roche, in his essays "The Sources of American Liberty," in which 

his thesis is that more Americans have more liberty and freedom today than ever 

before, says: 

The great power for gcod of the national government has as an inevi- 
table concomitant a great pow^r for evil. From my point of view there are 
no inexorable forces at work roving the United States towards authoritar- 
ianism, but the liberal corrmunity must realize that the instruments of 
national power it so casually bestowed upon the national government in the 
period 1935-1952 are capable of employment against its interests. 'The 
sword cares not who wields ft nor whose blood it sheds.' It is perhaps 
at this point that an imps: ti 1 sociological observer might regret the 
domestication of American roi onfe.-mists.- alluded to above: so large a 
proportion of the American re orm elite was taken into the firm in the 
1930's and 19^0's that few voces but these of the crackpot Right are 
disposed to criticize and tttack. 

And in further elaboration, he soy.;: 

No sane man will deny that the potential threats to American freedom 
from possible state action aro far greater in I963 than they were in I833 
or 1913. The great apparatus of federal power could be employed for evil 
ends as wail as for good ori^ ana the real possibility of resistance to 
centrali iad power has vanished. I would submit that any sober evaluation 
of the contribution of the national government to the improvement or the 
decline of civil liberty mist conclude on the basis of the evidence to 
date with a decision in favor of federal intervention. 

Anyone who cherishes the ideals of individual freedom and justice 
can never relax his efforts to push forward the frontiers of liberty. ... 
despite the existence of a huge centralized state, he is today free to enjoy 
a range of personal liberty unknown to his ancestors. 2 

The main political problem in the United States is to use the immense power 

of the national government to foster freedom and liberty. Great strides have 

been made, as indicated by Roche, particularly in civil rights, competitive 

bargaining, development projects similar to the Tennessee Valley Authority, 

and Supreme Court rulings to equalize voting, but nothing is more true than 

Uoche's other point which stresses that every great power for good entails a 


'.John P. Roche, Shadow and Substance , p. 56. 
2 Ibid ., pps. 7^-77. 


m 


concomitant power of perversion. A complex, as potentially powerful as the 
military-industrial one is, becomes more capable of perversion when it includes 

Congress. 

Control by Congress 

Admiral Rickover told Congress that it had the ability to control the 
industrial -political complex. By .implication he assumed that, if Congress 
through its investigative power:. Ajuld controi the industrial portion of the 
complex, then the military portion would also be controlled. ■* Undoubtedly this 
idea has considerable merit. S :ato and local governments are engaged actively 
in securing defense industry, but the focal point still remains in Congress. 
Here is where money is appropriated and undoubtedly a Congressman's influence 
in Washington is not only desirable, but could be indispensable, since this is 
where final decisions are made. Congressmen i.ave the authority and ability 
to control Congress as they make their own rules. But the incontrovertible fact 
is that Congress, throughout the history of the country, has shown little 
inclination to control "pork barrel" legislation and, while individual Congress- 
men occasionally recommend controls, there has been no concerted drive toward 
achieving any meaningful results in this field, and to expect Congress to do so 
in the future seems futile. Congress has a vested interest in fostering the 
growth of the railitary-industri.J complex, because it means business for 
Congressional constituents and reelection for Congressmen. 

Congress, by itself, will not provide the means to control the military- 
industrial complex and the paradox remains that, without the assistance of Con- 
gress, no action will probably be taken. 


^ Hearings Before a Subconm- i ttae of the Committee on Appropriations, 
af Representatives, Sdth Cong., 2d Sess. (1964), pps. <W>7, W, 512-516. 


.35 


esidency 

As Richard E„ Neustadt say: ., ,'n his valuable book on Presidential Power , 

ybsdy row expects the mar. o'e'the White House to do something about every- 

k 
thing." The President has en a powar and can galvanize action for a 

:ific goal in many ways but his greatest power, according to President 

nah, is persuasion. 5 For the President to persuade Congressmen to act, 

according to Neustadt, "is to induce them to believe that what he wants them 

to do is what their own appraisnl of their own responsibilities requires them 

to do in their interest, not hiiV'S 

Under the stress of a national emergency, the President could doubtlessly 
persuade Congress, as he often has, to act according to his wishes. But the 
military-industrial complex presents no sudden or urgent national emergency; its 
effect has exerted a growing influence in an area in which Congress, as a whole, 
has vital interests of its own. The President speaks for "all the people" while 
Congressmen speak for their individual constituencies and, as Burns and Peltason 
say, "are elected by different alignments of voters and hence have differing 
loyalties and respond to different pressures." 7 Outside of President Jefferson, 
I to a lesser degree President Washington, never has a President been able to 
speak with positive assurance (except during "honeymoon" periods or national 
emergency) that Congress would follow his lead. Even a strong President like 
Theodore Roosevelt complained that his strongest opposition was among his own 
party. On a subject so general as the protection of the liberty and freedom 
of the individual and the safety of democratic processes, Congress would never 


^Richard E. Neustadt, Presidential Power, p. 6. 
?Ibid» , p. 32. 


^Ibid ., p. 46. 

/James KacGregor Burns and Jack Walter Peltason, Government By The People, 

P. HHO. r 

8 Joan Coyne HacLean, President and Congress, p. 61 . 


186 


speak with unanimity. It is a group of autonomous, conflicting, irreconciliable 
committees, tieustadt is correc; in saying, 

Until there is a marriac s be^.ieen presidential and congressional 
:es, particularly at :he stage nomination, there will be no 
mar*. be seen President arc! Congress.^ 

[s another rr.ore basic reason why the President is unable to act 
with the needed continuity under the present organization of our executive 
branch and cannot provide the needed organization for discussion and action 
regarding the military-industrinl complex. If Congress is fragmented, so is 
the executive branch. Neustadt's study shows that the Cabinet represents 
its own Department more than overall national interest and the oft quoted 
remark of President Truman is considered representative. "I sit here all day 
trying to persuade people to do the things they ought to have sense to do 
without my persuading them. . . . That's all the powers of the President amount 
to."' The Presidency is a many-faceted position. The President is Chief of 
State, Chief Executive, Chief Diplomat, Commander-in-Chief, Chief Legislator, 
Chief of Party and Chief of the Economy. If the assertion of this thesis is 
accepted, it will be necessary to cdd to all these positions another one— Chief 
Protector of Individual Liberties ».nd Freedom . As may have been reiterated 
innumerable times, the President must consider all of his positions in making 
a decision. 

The present problem is to make certain that he considers the latter 
job when making decisions. In ell his different positions he has assistance 
throughout the executive branch and, in many of these duties, Congress and the 
Judiciary have responsibilities also. While the Cabinet doesn't 


^Neustadt, op., eft., p. 19': 
' "Ibid ., pps. 9-10. 


187 


represent all, or at present even the most important assistance the President 
receives, it is usually considered the body that provides his principal advi- 
sors. Eisenhower spoke for himself, in his farewell address, in warning the 
nation about the industrial-military complex. It is unknown whether the Eisen- 
hower cabinet of businessmen would have wholeheartedly supported his thesis 
on the military-industrial complex. It might have accepted the lofty and 
general terms of the address but it appears reasonable that when it came to 
positive action as to limitation or control of the military-industrial complex,' 
a consensus would have been very £"fficult to obtain. Eisenhower tried hard 
to make his cabinet a unified v< Ic :, but as F: chard J. Fenno points out, the 
cabinet at best is only a sound::-.; board for the President." The normal cabinet 
follows the description of Rexforc G. Tugwell: 

A new President sits clown at the table facing a Cabinet, not of 
friends or even of prospective loyal associates, but of representatives 
he has felt compelled to accept by political arrangement. They have in 
cc.-..v,on only membership in a party recent'iy victorious in an election. 
Individuals among them may not agree with the plans made by the President, 
and they may regard themse'.ves as political rivals— an impulse likely to 
grow stronger as they are encouraged by the interests that gather behind 
them.' 2 

Cabinet officers all have their own administrations with built-in pressures and 

loyalties to their respective departments. These duties are extensive and 

time-consuming. Even if the President could count on the entire executive 

branch supporting him, there appears to be no department of the present Cabinet 

capable of logically assuming the mission for drafting legislation, and making 

recommendations pertaining to the erosion of personal liberties. The departments 

of Commerce and Defense both have vested interests and would be suspect from the 


Richard J. Fenno, "Now I;; The Time For Cabinet Makers," New York Times 
Magazine, November 20, I960, p. 12. 

,2 Rexford G. Tugwell, The Enlargement of the Presidency , pps. 1 73-17'*. 


188 


start. While there are aspects of the military-industrial complex as 
evidenced by GAO reports to Congress that should be handled by the Department 
of Justice and there maybe other legal infractions but the primary purpose, 
as will be seen later, is to advise the President and Congress and to provide 
a forum that may produce a consensus requiring legislative action first. And 
if there is a problem existing at present, there is also sufficient reason to 
accept Eisenhower's contention that it will persist. It seems apparent that 
the fragmentation within Congress by party, committee, and district, the 
failure of the problem to fit into any single department within the executive 
branch, and the continuing historic conflict between Congress and the executive 
branch would alt combine to prevc.-,: any meaningful results on such a general 
subject as the loss of individujl rreedom and liberty caused by the military- 
industrial complex. If the national government is to become effective in this 
area, a new commission is needec. 

A New Commission 

In 1950, Cr. H. D. Lasswell, Professor of Law at Yale, in his book 
National Security and Individual Freedom, was one of the first to draw atten- 
tion to the fact that freedom wes diminishing because the separation of the 
military and civilian spheres was breaking down, defense expenditures were 
rising, and the government was not only expanding but becoming more centralized. 
Other changes, he noted, with attendant loss of freedom were the weakening of 
political parties; decline in the influence of Congress, civilian administrators, 
and the courts; withholding of information; increased police investigation; and 
a decline in the relevancy and influence of the press and public opinion. 


'^Harold Dwight Lasswell, national Security and Individual Freadom , New 
York, McGraw-Hill Book Company," Inc., 1950. 


189 


Not all these subjects are considered pertinent to this thesis nor is it 

agreed that Lasswell proves Ms position in ail of them but it is important 

to note that even a recognized scholar such as Dr. Lasswell believes that one <i 

cannot isolate the military-industrial compler. without considering the Congress, 

courts, press, and public opinion. This fact becomes self-evident to any 

student studying the subject. Dr. Lasswell also held that national security 

demands all the sacrifices necessary to preserve American independence but, 

as he says, 

If the crisis continues for years, es seems probable, and rises to 
even higher levels of interuiiy, as seems likely, effective freedom of 
choice will be restricted t-y :;he necessities of defense. One urgent 
problem is how to keep there acrifices of freedom at the lowest point 

; with national security, since an unnecessary loss of freedom 
is an unnecessary blow to :ecurity.1^ 

Dr. Lasswell 's solution war to expand the NSC (National Security Council) 
to three additional permanent members who wouid have no other government res- 
ponsibilities except to review all security policies and advise the President 
as to their effect on individuei liberties. Ke would assign to t'r.a NSRB 
(National Security Resources Board), now replaced by OEP (Office of Emergency 

Planning), the responsibility to assess the impact of security upon the free 

15 

economy. * In Congress he would establish comprehensive national security com- 
mittees representing all committees with jurisdiction in the field in order to 
give Congress an overall view of security which he claims is lacking at present. 


j- flbid. , p. k$ 

10., p. 80, 81. Actually an eight-point program is recomnvanded: (1) 
.-tiraa civilian member:; to be added to the NSC with no othar government 
than to formulate and review security poHciej, (2) one full-time member to 
/ security measures on individ al liberties, (3) one full-time 
member responsible for effecting flow of info. nation to the public on national 
security, (■'-:■) clarify and develop ;he function of NSRB (now replaced by 0PM), 
(5) establish within the Department; of Defense a strong civilian staff indepen- 
dent of control by military ser'icas to aid in developing and evaluating security 
policy, (6) eliminate extraneous, functions fna the control of the armed forces, 
(7) develop a program of advanced training wi :hin the government under civilian 
auspices to provide a comprehensive grasp of security policies within the frame- 


n::iva gra 
Hon, (8) 


work of our objectives as a nation, (8) President to devote a portion of his 


190 


Also recommended is that ths Pre si dent devote a part of his annual State of the 
Union message to a discussion of tr<e problems involved in the relationship of 
the national security problem tc t>.e problems of civilian supremacy freedom 
of information, civil liberty, snd a free ecoromy. 

Lasswell's solution is the only concrete proposal dealing with the entire 
subject I have found, and it wa; r iccmr.snded fifteen years ago; the problem has 
noi diminished since then. Lasswell's plan hes advantages in that it recog- 
nizes the military-industrial ccmplex is not an isolated problem and also 
recognizes the first requirement, in protecting individual freedom and liberty 
in a democracy is an informed public. This plan also recognizes that 
individual freedom and liberty is -he most priceless ingredient in American 
democracy and the plan has placed ;he responsibility for maintaining it in the 
NSC, the principal advisory body .^ the President. It would also outline specific 
duties for the President. It would require him to review decisions concerning 
freedom and liberty in his annual message to Congress and the people. 

Lassv»U'S plan has certain drawbacks that would reduce its effectiveness. 
Chiefly, it fails to recognize that the complex is Congressional -military- 
industrial and that any improvement over present conditions must consider the 
role of Congress. While he has furnished the President with an expert adviser 
on liberty and freedom, any recarcr.sndations for legislative correction must go 


annual message to discussing national security program in relation to civilian 
supremacy, freedom of information, civil liberty, and a free economy. 

^ 7lbid a , p<, 104. Program for Congress consists of six points: (1) estab- 
lish comprehensive national security committees, representing all committees 
with any jurisdiction in the field, (2) increase the amount of technical infor- 
lable to Congress by additional steffs in the Legislative Reference 
.■ibrary of Congress, (3) members of Congress provide their con- 
stituents with more comprehensive information about the security position and 
problems of the nations, (4) Congress to safeguard individual freedom by pro- 
viding a model of fair play in its own hearings, (5) all lobbying and pro- 
paganda activities, concerning national security made a matter of public record, 
(6) establish a Commission on National Security and Individual Freedom if the 
abova recciroendati ons do not work. 


191 


to Congress for implementation end as Congress is not being a party to 
formulating the recommendations, it would be apt to ignore them. Administratively 
Lasswell has separated duties between NSC and OEP which would only divide the 
job, giving two heads for one job. Further, addition of three members to the 
NSC with no other responsibilities ^ut protection of liberty and freedom would 
make the plan unacceptable to ttu present NSC, which has only five members 
(President, Vice-President, Secrctiry of Statt, Secretary of Defense, and 
Director of OEP), in addition to :ne permanent administrative secretariat con- - 
sisting of the Special Assistar.1: ;sr Ni-.c.ial Security and the Executive Secre- 
tary. Further, these three men ..o'-ld have to .iave organizational support. 
They could never perform their joo adequately without a well-trained staff. 

Lasswell 's concluding reccr.-.-.i.idation is that, if his previous recommendations 
as already outlined did not prove .'orkable, a "Civilian Commission on National 
Security and individual Freedom'' (hereafter called the Commission) be established 
along with a Joint Committee of Congress on ;. dividual Freedom (hereafter called 
the Joint Committee). The Commiss on would h ve responsibilities to both President 
end the Joint Committee similar to the Atomic Energy Commission and the Joint 
Committee on Atomic Energy. Th'"s action el im. nates the main objection to 
Lasswell 's first proposal. 

The main purpose for such ;. Commission is increased public information, 
the law establishing such an agency would under my concept state that all written 
reports to the President as well as to the Joint Committee would be made public, 
except in specific cases to be covered later. Included in this concept would be 
that only the head of the Commission would be a member of NSC. The practice of 
privileged advice to the President must not be abrogated, as far as the head of 
the Commission is concerned. I it it should be his prime duty to point out to 


192 


the President the probable adverse consequences to individual freedom or to 
the traditional processes of government that any NSC decision might have. 

e President should inform the people of any NSC decision that he supports 
in contradiction to these recommendations. He could do this periodically but, 
in accordance with Lasswell's recommendation, a portion of the State of the 
Union message devoted to the recoraendations of the Commission would enable 
the public to assess the thinking of the President as well as his actions on 
this all-important subject. Similarly, it should be required that the senior 
House and Senate merobers of the Joint Committee report to the Senate and the 
House respectively, outlining t - econ nendations of the Joint Committee with 
legislation concerning the rcpo ts of the Co; ,ission. In this manner the public 
would be informed by an organization v.l'.oso so e job would be the protection of 
individual liberties, and which hed access to the information upon which 
■"&cc « wer« made and, above all, had loyalties to both Congress and the 
President. The President would present his views to the people, at least in the 
State of the Union message, and Congress would have the benefit of its own 
members reviewing all recommendations. The press would be fully informed and 
other organizations interested 'n government, as well as individual scholars, 
would also be able to assess the recommendations from the Commission, the 
executive branch, and the Congress. These organizations would also have a 
responsible government agency that would be concerned with their recommendations. 

The solution will seem overly simplified to some and impossible of 
attainment to others. Undoubtedly the main obstacle would be getting Congress 
to approve a Commission that would be critica'i of Congress. This is a formidable 
obstacle, but there are advantages for Congressmen that might make it acceptable 
to them. One of these is in tha trea of CIA. Congress does not have the control 


193 


over this organization that man/ Congressmen I elieve desirable. As a member 
of the NSC, the head of the Commission would be privy to the counsels and 
assignments given to CIA. This would not satisfy Wise and Ross who, in The 
InvisiMe Government , say that the present Congressional subcommittees should 
be replaced with a Joint Committee similar to the Joint Corvnittee on Atomic 

■J Q 

Energy. m the Atomic Energy Committee there has never been a leak of 
classified data and there is no reason to believe that another Congressional 
Committee would be any less responsive to its responsibilities. But, lacking . 
a special Joint Committee on C! - he presenc of an agency outside CIA respon- 
sible for reviewing its actions re| , tine to Congress should go a long way 
to satisfying the demands and r: . of ;cngr« 3. 

Another area which should ...: .al to Congress is in the matter of classifi- 
cation of -"on. This Commission's main purpose would be to increase the, 
flow of information. At presenl there is no government agency responsible for/ 
determining whether material should be released to the public or remain secret. 
Each agency is responsible unto itself. By broad category this Commission would 
have the responsibility to recommend declassification. The press has little 
confidence in the present system The existence of an outside agency to whom 
the press could appeal when it felt that classification was being ma 1 administered 
in the interests of an agency would certainly restore, in a great measure, 
confidence to the public that needed knowledge is available. The classification 
function of the Commission would be the only one in which it would have 
responsibilities directive in nature. As the Commission would be privy to the 
decisions of NSC, which would include those of Defense as well as those of CIA 
and The State Department, the Commission should not be given judicial responsi- 
bility to declassify, but each agency should be required to justify actions 
which disagreed with the Commission's recommendations. The Commission, as the 

18 David Wise and Thomas B. Ross, The Invisible Government , p. 35k. 


194 


representative of the people and Congress in these matters, would have a salu- 
tary effect. At least it should tend to stop the withholding of information 
which would be only embarrassing to the administration or certain highly 
placed individuals. Classification of information would be based solely on 
national interest and infomaticn :ould become available as soon as possible 
in the public interest. 

Effeci of Corr,iission 

The total effect of the Commission on the military-industrial complex 
cannot be foreseen, but it should be considerable in many areas of government. 
First it would have to determine what present practices and trends are 
inimical to the democratic proct.^-s of government and individual liberty. It 
would probabjy decide that many present practices are satisfactory and need no 
change. But let us consider scr.e of the recommendations that might be made. 
None of these ideas are new, and some have been offered many times. Above 
all, they are not all-inclusive, Out the Commission would develop data and 
reasons which would make some of them politic* lly expedient. 

The considerable empire of the armad forces to indoctrinate the general 
public in all phases of military a .deavor wou':d undoubtedly be an area that 
the Commission would scrutinize cai-efully. The military tie-in with indus- 
try in this vast public relations effort might result in censure or closer 
budgetary control. Undoubtedly thj type of position retired officers could 
accept in industry would be scrutinized. For instance, the Commission might 
decide that a retired officer could accept a position as a technician or re- 

ch specialist but could not accept a position in industry as a board member 
or a sales representative— or that retired officers could not work for a certain 
period of time after retirement with companis > doing defense business. There 


195 


might be a limitation on the nur.iber of retired officers any company could hire 
depending upon the amount of government busin.ss the company did annually. 
Full disclosure of the duties o"' the retired officer in industry might be 
required. Retired officers cou.d be limited to government employment in 
certain definite areas. Congressmen in reserve units might be asked to resign 
their military commissions or, at least, not to serve on any Congressional 
Committee dealing with defense. 

As for businessmen entering government, there would be rules as to the 
type of government job they could accept, depending upon their former 
employment. The Commission night decide that to force businessmen entering 
government to dispose of their business holdings was desirable but that it 
was just as desirable for Congrti3£-aan to do the same thing. They are both public 
officials. At least rules would be established for the conduct of businessmen 
entering government and for Con;.-e -smen dealing with the Defense Department on 
contracts. Lobbying for defense contracts wo Id be closely regulated and all 
negotiations for defense contracir would be public. 

There are regulatory agencies for power, communications, railroads, etc., 
so the Conraisaion might recommend ihat all defense contracts be removed from 
the Defense Department and placed under a new regulatory agency. Kilitary 
requirements, specifications, and areas for research and development would still 
have to be controlled by the Defense Department, but under the new system, all 
purchasing and contracting would be done by the regulatory agency. Rules and 
methods for negotiating defense contracts, to include accounting procedures, 
would be uniform. Undoubtedly :.uch an innovc ion would be resisted by the mili- 
tary services and by industry and, if accepte. , would initially caise duplication 


196 


and might be more costly. But such a regulation would also certainly make 

conflict of interest more difficult, and democracy is not essentially interested 

in cost when perpetuation of democratic processes are at stake. Before such 

a recommendation would be made there would have to be evidence, which is lacking 

now that the present system has weaknesses. 

Changes in the ways industry executes defense business and the necessary 

adjustments in the political sphere, mainly in Congress, will be much more 

difficult to attain than change;, in the military side of the complex. After 

all, the military is a compact, closely supervised group, and it takes orders. 

As Hanson Baldwin says, in commenting on the liebert Committee investigating 

conflict of interest, 

It should recognize that the retired officer is only a very small 
part of a much bigger prob'.eir:; that the retired officer's services are 
needed bosh by industry and Government; that very few, if any, are guilty 
of improper acts, and that a clarification, modernization, and codifica- 
tion of the conflict-of -interest laws and regulations--with discrimina- 
tion el".Tr;r,2ted~is in the public interest. 

And Mr. Stanley Hiller, Jr., in reviewing the Array-industry relationship, said 

that a "closer union is needed not only in the planning stages of the specialized, 

complex programs, but literally throughout the product's life from the cradle 

to the grave." 20 Both of these views would have to be considered but it 

appears that legislation is all that would be required to control the military 

side of the complex. Congress i iwilo! ba different, as it makes its own rules, 

freedom of action is a fetish with American businessmen. 


°U. S. Congress, House, Subcommittee fo;- Special Investigations of the 
itee on Armed Services, HstrinjjS, Employ—ant of R et ired and Civilian Per- 


sonnel by Defense Industries, "¥bth Cong., 1st Sess., l"9o2, p. 136. 

'"'Stan'iey Hiller, Jr., "Technical Competence—Basis For Change," Army, 
May 1964, p. 31. 


197 


Another area in which the (.emission might be influential is in the field 
of vertical mergers. Horizontal mergers have been illegal under the Sherman and 
Clayton Acts but the new type of vertical merger is driving out small businesses 
that cannot compete. 21 If there is any truth to Mills' theory that a small 

group of men is making all the important decisions in industry and government, 

22 

the evidence should be found in interlocking directorates. A law that would 

limit the number of corporationr. in which a person could be an active director 
should be investigated. The Department of Justice would still have the job of 
enforcing the lav;. The Coramiss- -..sitility would be to indicate areas 

where individual liberty is threat red and to suggest to the President and 
Congress nev laws for the Depi ov JuGti:e to enforce. 

Unions should come under t. 3 .:,« Consuls ion scrutiny as industry. There 
is sufficient evidence that e s grown they have, in soma cases, 

become more Interested in their own power tht: in forwarding the interests of 
their members. Certainly recommendations might be made which would alleviate 
the spiraling of wages and prices which are restricting liberties of many who 
are victims of the process. 

Lennox McLendon, top investigator in the Baker case, says that, in his 

opinion, Bobby Baker was at one tirae more powerful in the Senate than any of the 

23 

100 elected members. His influence: extended to both Republicans and Democrats. 

The Senate reluctantly investigated Baker in regard to relations with civilians 
end government employees, but s:ae Jfastly revised to reveal his dealings with 


^Richard J. Barber, 'fHergers" Threat to Free Enterprise," Challenge, 
rtarch 1963s. p. 7. 

22 PhiHp Olson, ed„ Americ a As A Mass Society , as quoted frets: the National 
Resources Committee. 'The Structure of Contro.s," ops. 72-75. 

2 3james McCartney, "Sobby Baker's Power Appraised," Kansas City Star , March 
A, 1965, p. 20. This was not at the time President Johnson was majority leader, 
but during the period when Senator Mansfield took over after Johnson was elected 
Vice-President. 


198 


other Senators. The view of Senators and Representatives that because they 

are elected by the people and their record is reviewed by the people at election 

time they should have special status and be able to operate more or less 

secretly and with immunity is preposterous, even though it is traditional. 

Election does not insure probity fn a public official any more than appointment 

does. The same rules should apply to both. If Secretary McNamara should 

divest himself of all stock in Ford Motor Conv-any, the public should know which 

Senators and Congressmen have personal interests in which corporations. The 

right of the people to know how legislators eern income in addition to their 

government salary should not be c^^stioned in a democracy. The Report of the 

Twenty-Sixth American Assembly says: 

Respect for the goverr.s^nt requires respect for its indicidual offi- 
cials. Each Senator and Representative and all Presidential appointees 
should be required to reoprt annually their financial interests and the 
sources of their income. 

Income tax reports of all Senators, Congressmen, Presidential appointees, 
military officers of general or admiral rank, businessman and corporations 
doing public business should be available to the public. Maybe this should 
extend to all corporations for, as Gabriel Kolko aptly points out, "A corpora- 
tion is now, essentially a non-statute political institution, and its directors 
are in the same boat with public office holders." ' The public has a right 
to know how public officials and businessmen doing public business invest 
their money and increase their cea'ith. It would appear that individuals who do 
not wish to make this type of infer-nation available should not run for public 
office, engage in business with the government, or accept positions in the 
executive branch. That corporations claim that making these reports available 
would give valuable information to competitors should not be allowed to stand 


2 Report of the 26th Assembly, op_. cit ., p. 8. 
2 5oison, op_. cit., p. 109. 


199 


in the way of the greater public interest. Profits made by corporations 
doing government business is a part of the information a democratic society is 
entitled to have, and it entails a loss of individual liberties when such 
information is kept secret for individual or corporate gain. There would 
be no law that would reduce conflict of interest quite so readily as one that 
would make income tax reports available for public scrutiny. There is no 
expectation that Congress would consider such a law on its own initiative. 
However, if the Commission recommended such a law and each Congressman and 
Senator was required to take a stand before the electorate on such an issue, 
undoubtedly an aroused public would see the advantages and changes might occur. 
There is little disagreement by Congressmen or leading political scientists 
with the conclusion that Congress needs reorganization and more explicit 
rules, but to accomplish these changes Congress needs the assistance of public 
opinion and recorsnandations frori the Commission could obtain the necessary 
public interest. At the present time a Congressman can campaign for a bill, 
introduce it into Congress, have, it assigned to a Committee, and this can easily 
be the last the public will hee;- cjout it until the next election. The public 
is entitled to know why and hew .: -e bills a -e killed in committee. Secretary 
Ickes recorded in his diary that the opinion of Vice-President Garner was that 
there ought not to be any execu:iv2 session of any congressional cenmittees. 
He made the point that it was all public business and that reporters should 
be permitted to attend any committee meeting. Still, in 1953, 39% of Senate 
Committee meeting- and 38% of House Committee meetings were secret. Probably 
the worst effect of the present system is that secrecy really does not exist. 
Each legislator leaks to the public his version of what happened in a committee 


°Wiggins, op. cit ., ppc. i2«13. 


200 


meeting and what he wants his public to know. The public in many cases is not 

27 
only informed, it is misinformeco 

The Commission might also have recommendations for protecting indivi- 
dual liberties before Congressional committees. While the excesses of McCarthyism 
have not reached the same heights again, many individuals are still tried legis- 
latively who could not be tried legally. Lascvell claims it is necessary for 
Congress to provide the example of fair play in its own hearings in order to 
safeguard individual liberty, 2 a.i-J one of the recommendations of the 26th 
Assembly is: "Each chamber should -dopi and er.force effective procedures to pro- 
tect the constitutional and otht:- Taditional rights of citizens called before 
its committees." ° 

Many states have given the governor the right to veto individual items in 
appropriation bills. Practically all student- of government, except Congressmen, 
agree that, if the President coild veto specific items of appropriation bills, 
economies could be made in goverr<.r..;nt and this would be most applicable and 


2 7lbi.d>, pps. 19-20. James Russell Wiggins gives seven reascru why legis- 
lative DOdfes in a democracy shcu't :i meet in the open: (1) public business and 
not private business is the obj<c; of their deliberations, (2) 1ig-i:;lative power, 
in a democracy, remains with the w ole people, and is only yielded in part, and 
for stated intervals, to indivi. cting for the whole people, (3) 

open proceedings enlist the ii ice of the whole community in ;he lawmaking 

process, (4) public proceedings broaden participation in goveraxent by citizens 
as a whole and make citizens to a certain extent participants in th^ government, 
(5) public proceedings protect the comrv-mity, the state, or the nation against 
the possibility of wrongdoing, eft ier by individual lawmakers who may mislead 
or deceive a majority or by a whole legislative body, (6) at the saas time, they 
protect the honest and conscientious legislator from successful imputation of 
wrong conduct by false accuserSj (7) public proceedings protect a legislative 
body against being made the vie* 1m of fraud or misrepresentation by witnesses 
appearing at legislative heari. 

2 Lasswell, op. cit ., p. 1C 

29Report of the 2oth American Assembly, c£. cit., p. 7. 


201 


probably most effective in regard to defense appropriations. Congress still 
would have the considerable power of overriding the veto. If Congress could 
muster this type of support, it would be an extreme case in which the President 
would fail to follow the direction of Congress. The present arrangement of not 
spending money for particular weapons satisfies neither Congress nor the public 
but increases tension between Congress and the President. 

The regulatory agencies also need examination from the viewpoint of the 
public. Walter Adams and Horace H« Gray have written a book entitled Monopoly 
In America, in which their thes'j .'s that government, mainly in these regulatory 
agencies, fosters monopoly, qui nopoly, a.,d imperfect competition by its 
policies. 3° Just because these leguiatory agencies have been found necessary 
does not mean that they have not c 'crstepped aeir original purpose and have 
not increased their power in ways ot intended. This is a natural tendency of 
government. Perhaps the Commit ton would find means to eliminate some government 
controls that would restore los'.: competition. There could be some consolidation 
in government by transferring duties from precent agencies to the Commission. 
Cne obvious addition to the Cordis si on would be the Civil Rights Commission 
whose duties are to investigate deprivation of voting rights due to color, 
race, religion, or national orinir. and to report its findings and recommendations 
to Congress and the President. Only very peripherally is the Civil Rights 
Commission related to the milit; .-y-industria? complex but it is intimately 
related to individual liberties and freedoms egarding the denial of equal 
protection of the laws under the Constitution 31 


3 "Walter M. Adams and Haro'. d M. Gray, Monopo ly In America, p. XIV. 

3'General Service Administration, Office of The Federal Register, National 
Archives and Record Office, Unit ed States Government Organizational Manual , pps. 
535-536. 


202 


Every government has different methods of economic control. When dealing 
with totalitarian governments or datnocracies, business has found out that the 
goverrjnent is a required partner in overseas markets . Tariffs which once 
were necessary to protect infant industries are now used for many different 
purposes. These commitments, both internal and external, should be reviewed 
from the standpoint of individual iiberty and democratic processes as well as 
that of the image the United Stetes desires to portray to other countries. The 
United States is using all Its rces to convince other nations lhat its 

type of democracy is best for t! i =st coplt This Includes free enterprise. 
The American image in these c:. ant. Not only official 

declarations, but the actions c .'seals, CIA, and the military should 

be reviewed from the standpoint c sratic freedom and liberty is 

the ultimate result obtained frca ::his great increase of official Americans in 
foreign countries. In over b0 countries, the United States has MAAG's (Military 
Assistance Advisory Groups)." Our troops are deployed all over the world. 
Their military job, for the most part, is unquestioned but a review by a disinter- 
ested government agency with particular attention to methods used is warranted. 
In addition, the militarymen stationed in foreign countries reach down into 
many of the constiunities of the underdeveloped nations to develop plans and train 
indigenous troops to do civilian jobs such as building roads, schools, churches, 
sanitary facilities, etc. 

Army technicians—engineers, food handlers, automotive mechanics, 
communicators, medics, and others—are daily training Asian military per- 
sonnel in skills important to civilian as well as military life. Ulti- 
mately this trained manpower joins the civilian economy and becomes the 
nucleus of a slowly growing and badly needed force of indigenous skilled 
labor.33 


3 2 The Department of the Aruy, United States Army and World Security , p. 70. 
33General James F. Collins, "The Array in Pacific Area," Army , December, 
1963, p. 62. 


203 


The civilian work done by the military Is undoubtedly worthwhile, necessary, 
and a job that both the Army and foreign governments recognize with pride. 
There are convincing arguments for increasing it rather than decreasing it. 
The Array has traditionally engaceo in civil wcrks in the United States and this 
may be one of the best ways to sell freedom ar.d liberty, but this job and all 
other missions being performed eve -seas should be evaluated by some agency other 
than those performing them. If the co'.d war is an ideological battle and the 
result hoped for by the United Jta es is the practice of United States democracy, 
the democratic traditions of th< U rcec! State! must be practiced by our official 
representatives throughout the »: . : 'cc-Icn could bring unbiased 
opinion to the President, to Co: 3S, il a te the public in regard to the entire 
field of our growing relations. k;1t!i otl ;.-ss. 

Oemocrc ti c Instituti ens 

The United States is proud of its fras institutions of press, pulpit, and 
education. Unhampered for the n.ost part by federal control, all have a proud 
heritage of independence and responsibility for informing and educating the 
public. The proposed Comraissior. iiould have a profound effect on all three 
if for no other reason than that more factual information would be available. 

Beginning with Thomas Paine during the Revolution for Independence and 
followed by Harriet Beecher Stove and the "Abolitionists" during the Civil War 
period, the Hearst Press in the War of 1812, the fight for democracy in World 
War I, and even now President Johnson's progre-a for "medicare" and assistance 
to education the press keeps the public infonr.ed and is a powerful instrument to 
instigate action. There is no e'ea.-th of information on the Congressional- 
military-industrial complex as a distinct entity. There is also considerable 


204 


information connecting its constituent groups and showing the interrelationship 
between them. Faithfully reported by the press are cancellations of defense 
projects such as Skybolt, RS-70, HMR3M and, with each cancellation, attacks 
follow in the trade journals, until now skepticism of McNamara's decisions 
in military development of weapons systems is being questioned by seme. 34 

On the other hand there is little said after such a cancellation as to 
the aspects of individual liberty end freedom or an evaluation of unwarranted 
influence by the P olitical-mi1it,;ry~industrial complex except by the partisans 
who lost contracts. It is mainly an economic debate. The 1964 Presidential 
campaign, with the opposing yf«ws of Qoldwater recommending more manned 

ibers end the administration recommending primary reliance on ICMB's, is 
an example. 3 * tot hing is being seid about evaluating the costs of the two 
concepts nor about the influence of the Congressional-military-industrial complex 
in this debate. Maximum defense, regardless of cost, is still the persuasive 
political view. The political ques< ions Americans are interested in are 
security and economy: how much <poc can a Representative or Senator do for 
his district or state? The press, when considered as a whole, faithfully 
presents all the angles of this side of the controversy particularly as it 
affects the area it serves. Lttt . or no evaluation is made as to individual 
liberty or increased influence of the Congressicnal-military-industrial complex, 
nor is the general public interested. Economic and military security are more 
important than individual liberty and freedom as far as news is concerned. 


34 u 


1965 D « nS |2, B ?/?' 1n 5 ,'.!, ,0W . 0< T in the P^gon," Foreign Affairs , January 
I9o5, pps. 2o3-2o4 and "New Look At Defense" - "Why cbnoress ~ WorH^ " n 7 
Wbrid Report, March 1, 1955, Dps . 37 _ 4K ny Consress Worries ' Udk 

Wer e 8f, S 96^ r p. SO lt r ''' *"*" CUy ^ Associated Press Dispatch, 


205 


Americans willingly give u.5 their liberties and freedom in order to advance 
their economic status by joining i.nior.s or associations which police their 
activities such as the Stock E: ige, American Medical Association or the 
American Bar Association, or by contracts sucli as athletes make in baseball, 
football, and other sports. The press faithf illy reports the existence, methods 
and aims of these organizations* They deprive individuals of freedom and 
liberty but are not considered a threat to a "ree nation. But when it comes 
to individual liberty and freed:.ii connected with the Congressionai-military- 
industrial complex, a complex s; I ;ge that it reaches into every Congressional 
district in the nation, the . k with unanimity no.- continuity 

nor is it expected to. Editor-; _'.. , magazine articles, and scholastic journals 
present a voluminous amount of material, gooo and bad, thoughtful end superficial, 
and of every shade of political belief and self-interest. There is no agency 
to digest this material factually and to present a program of action when 
necessary. What material is available comas from Congress, industry, or the 
Pentagon-- all of which are members of the con ilex. The material needs to be 
reevaluated objectively from t'm public point of view. Arthur Barber says, 
"I can think of no major problem, of national security or disarmament in which 
the basic information is not available from unclassified sources." This is 
certainly a minority point of view and is suspect, as Mr. Barber is a Deputy 
Assistant Secretary of Defense. 3ut his other charge is more substantial, 
as he says the material is scattered in the Congressional Record and Committee 
reports, executive reports, newspapers, and public statements which are not 
being adequately researched, correlated, synthesized and presented in a manner 


3 °Kansas City Star, October 15, 196**, p. 1. 


206 


from which the interested public c^n draw adecjate solutions. 

Fulsome praise can be given the press for its ability to recognize a timely 

news issue and to ferret out the details. Only on rare occasions does the 

daily press perform this detailed type of research suggested by Mr. Barber. 

As has been noted, the press has little confidence at present in governmental 

classification procedure. Operating on the democratic theory that the people 

can decide if they have the information, the Commission would have as its main - 

purpose to increase the flow of t\ aly inform; :ion to the public. The press 

undoubtedly would welcome an inc. . ndent agency that would be sympathetic 

to its charges- of suppression c . had sufficient influence to cause 

changes. There is no doubt th g - sss and the line agencies (StJte Department, 

Defense Department, Atomic Enerty ;omnrission, CIA and so on) 

tend to exaggerate the import nee nnd secrecy of their activities and to 
apply higher security standards than an informed outsider would consider 
justified by the facts. ... In addition, the line agencies, knowing that 
their decisions will be subject to review, would exercise considerably 
more care and discriminatic • r.ct usej on the opposite side of the 
fence, journalistic playinc off of one arency against another would be 
discourac;£d. 37 

There is another possible effect that could result. I have accepted that 
the press of the United States is •^sponsible,. That this conclusion is not 
fully true is hardly arguable. "■ : press coi d do much to increase its 
objectivity and quality. By bringing facts of irresponsibility to the attention 
of the public the Commission woi:ld create a healthful atmosphere of discussion 
within the press and might even bring some self-policing that would be bene- 
ficial. An example is the recer.t discussion over the actions of the press in 


37john P. Roche, Shadows ar.d Substance , p. 368. 


207 


trying criminal cases by the public before a jury has acted. } There are 
many other areas of sensational! ;rn and bias which could be corrected by free 
discussion and make our free pre;... which is undoubtedly one of the bulwarks of 
a free country, more responsive to our best ic'^als. Douglass Cater, a 
newspaperman, now a member of President Johnson's staff, makes a pica for 

political scientists to assess the responsibility of the press. He claims that 

39 

we have government by the newspapers consisting of trial balloons and leaks. 

The press is the first to declaim when it believes information it is entitled 

to is withheld. Still it continually withholds information the public is 

entitled to. By refusing to noire :he contact from which information is received, 

the press refuses the concerned citizen a vital element in assessing the 

reliability of the information. T-.e Commission might be influential in these 

areas in assisting our free p. more . ^sponsible. 

Next to be considered are i ional institutions. W. W. Rostow, in 

"United States in the World Are:;:,' 1 says: 

It is clear that the universities--; s a byproduct of their normal 
business are a major source of the fundamental ideas on which our military 
hardware, our foreign policy, large segments of our domestic policy, and 
our living concepts of the law ar;; based. Universities create ideas; and 
ideas are what we live by; what we build our machines out of; jnd in 
the end determine how we alert our basic institutions in the face of a 
changing reality.^' 

The above statement is ful y corroborate.: by the arms debate now in progress. 

This debate is covering every pi -: i of arms, ; is armament, war, peace, military 

strategy of all types, as well as Foreign policy in a thermonuclear age. 


38james J. Kilpatrick, "Fa r Trial - Fre ; Press Conflict Can't Be Fully 
Solved," Kansas City Star , February 25, 1965. 

39oouglass Cater, The Four h 3ranch of G o vernment, passim . 
^°W. W. Rostow, United Sta:e: : in the worfd Arena , p. iii. 


208 


Probably no subject has so enga 3 e( such a large percentage of the scholarly 
minds of the country since the adoption of tho Constitution was debated and 
every man who could read or wrr . to understand and have an opinion on 

Locke- Montesquieu, and Black! _ ^ to be expected that this debate 

should engage so many authors, i jhe survival of western 

civilization as we know it. ' Many foundations such as RAND, Rockefeller, 
Carnegie, Ford, and others ai rfng these projects. In this connection 

Arthur Herzog cc.T.raents, 

« °u S f, .*, he r " : :as 3boul American inte nectual life 

since World War II is , i its institutionalization into 

thought centers of one kirn a, ther, and nowhere is this more dearly 

true than in the kind of thinking that has been applied to the cold war. 
No less than three hundred study centers of all sorts now consult for the 
Department of Defense, T ,c a .cunt of brain-power such places can aqqlomer- 
tlt I S IT* 8 "** RAND | for Stance, has a staff of 1,100, of whom 600 
are professionals, and 2S0 of their. Ph.D.s, enough to staff a university.** 2 

Scholarly publication and research is also being accomplished in the graduate 
programs of universities, particularly at Yale, Harvard, Princeton, Massachu- 
setts Institute of Technology, Pennsylvania State University, Johns Hopkins, 
Chicago, Ohio State, and Stanford. 

The production and advice of these scholars have affected national policy. 
Several of the authors have been brought into responsible government positions, 43 
and two of these books, Henry Kissinger's The Necessity for Choice* * and Robert 
Osgood's Limited Warfare, 4 ? are credited with influencing the change in national 


4, Robert A. Levine, The Ansa Debate . This book and its bibliography present 
a salary of current opinion on -.he entTre subject without providing personal 

wO f (ibid ... | 

2 Arthur Herzog, The War-Pen c e Establishment, p. 54. 

** * „ 0f the P^ncipal contributors are w. W. Rostow, who is presently on the 

■^JSEf"""* W ?,""*."* 3oard and Heraan «*** wh ° »»« "eld severe? govern- 
ment positions, principally with the Air Force. s»vern 

^K 55 !^ I|!|iSiif£Lite "aw York, Harper 6 Brothers, I960. 
Robert E. Osgood, Limited Warfare, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, I9J2 


209 


policy under President Kennedy of "flexible response" from that of President 
Eisenhower's and Dulles' poticy of "massive retaliation." Military men are 
even co.-r.plaining that the sacred prerogative of the military to determine 
strategy has bsen preempted by scholars. 

While it is true that scholars deserve the major credit for bringing new 
ideas, theories, and many facets of war and peace in a thermonuclear age into 
sharp focus: it is also true that curriculums in the universities have not in 
the same degree kept pace with changing conditions. The military budget is 
50 to 60 percent of the national budget. At a time when military influence is 
having a profound effect upon the ation, few colleges are giving courses 
specifically in military history, military poHcy, military security, or 
foundations of national pc 

In a study completed in 1955 enly seven percent of the universities and 

colleges answering the questionnaire were giving courses purely in military 

47 
mstory or policy. On the other hand as the interrelationship of foreign policy 

and national security is inextricable it is true that the problems of security 

are being given more and more attention in allied courses. The same is true 

of the scientific revolution. Scientific history is quite new in our society.** 8 

Undergraduate courses in new field, must usually wait for professors to be 

trained in sufficient numbers for r..ajor curriculum changes to be made. If 

universities follow the normal path, it will be years before undergraduates are 

offered specific courses in military history, security and policy in a majority 

of our universities. Dr. Richard C. Brown co.-.jludes, 


fcart H. Gin "The Challenges to Military Professionalism," 
fli£_f°rce and S-::.^ Pigest. Hare-, \9ok, pps. 50-56. 

'Richard C. Srcvin, Thajfca-.^nq of Milit ary History in Colleg es and 
University, of tne United t: F Historical Studies: No. l^t ToTTk. 

■ Loren Eisley, "Che Genesis of Genius," review of Arthur Koestler's, 
The Art of Creation," The New York Times Book Review, October 18, 1964, p. 3. 


210 


A knowledge of military history is useful, even necessary, if our 
citizens are to be able to it decisions on the problems 

facing our country now and in the future,, For young men who are to spend 
even part of their adult lives in military service, the study of military 
history can be a profitable experience. At the graduate level, for the 
historian-in-training a study of military history is almost imperative if 
he is to be able to interpret twentieth century history in a meaningful 
fashion. There are job opportunities for historians with an interest 
in military history and training in the field. Military histo.-y is 
interesting; it can contribute color and drama to any course in history. 
And, finally, military history can be of service throughout an individual's 
life, as a hobby or avocation. ° 

The problems of war and peace in a thermonuclear age are being considered by 

the intelligentsia but the dialect: to a gree extent is written by the 

intelligentsia for the intelligt.v: fa and for those like J. F. Kennedy. 

It is expected that the C ion will -ntract with educational 
institutions for studies evu. id performing the necessary 

detailed research on various pr;.;: :- s » If successful this would create a 
better understanding by scholar: of problems ct the national level. This 
would appear to be a healthy development. 

Arthur Berber says: 

I can remember a time when facts and closely worded argument and con- 
troversial thought were the hallmark of the university scholar. Indeed, 
I believe I can recall a day when scholars would debate and write without 
a government contract or a foundation grant. 5° 

This implied condemnation is a most serious one for our universities. 

However, there are many scholar. y agencies in the United States not tied to 

government. They are usually or" two types: discussion groups which present 

differing opinions with no conclusions and groups, presenting conclusions and 

usually a plan of action. Of the first type, probably the most p.-estigous is 

the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions whose chairman is Robert 

H, Hutchins." There are many scholarly and ;ublicly-inspired groups sponsoring 


cf^E* cit ., p. 12. 

'Arthur Barber, "The Citizen, The Scholar, and The Policy Maker," Back- 
ground, August 1964, p. 84. 

5l Edward Reed, ed«. Challennes to Democracy; The Next Ten Years , New York, 
Frederick A. Praeger, 19637 


211 


.s second type, similar to the "American Assembly of 

. 2?ort, the 26th has been previously quoted, 

and America's Future." Both these organizations attract 

. niug and the foremost American leaders in all fields. 

-heir recommendations end thoughts are not discussed 

the press and scholarly publications. But again, it is like the intelligentsia 

-'ligentsia, for the irast part. The results of these discus- 

:._', e 1 miniltal to date. Probably the most important reason for this 

that there is no requiraner.t for government action. If any 

.-de in correcting or controlling the Congressional -ail itary- 
' industrial complex through a more informed public, the organization must exert 
with Congr i and the executive establishment to take 

ndations. It must be an organization that cannot be 

red. An organization simiKr to the Hoover Commission to improve government 

-ion could be the answer but it must have the continuity which the 

. - 

of the great democratic educational institutions 
to be cor... It is difficult to assess the effect of this independent 

and diffusa group of thinkers. Churchmen were leaders in defeating UMT by 

. _s with such organizations as the National Council Against 
an* Fellowship of Reconciliation, Friends Coraaittee on National 

-ional Council for Prevention of War.^ 2 Many leaders of the 
church ere active ih peace movenentj almost too numerous to mention like SANE 
,. for a San ■ Policy), which advocate a variety of 

-ions including unilateral disarmament, nn-resi stance, and non-violent 




52 John M. Swoir.. -,-y Establishment , p. X. 


212 


resistance. But there are also realists like Seinhold Niebuhr who contend 

that there is no one solution to world tensions but the problem of peace and 

war must be attacked on a broad front involving increased world trade, progress 

in education, economic development, better communication, and so on.^ At the 

turn of the century Right Reverend William Lawrence was not alone nor considered 

radical when he preached that "in the long run, it is only to the man of morality 

that wealth comes. " 5 ^ The church aa a whole has never conducted a vendetta 

against industry. A good portion of the church in America has always been able ' 

to make accomodation with the consensus on practically any subject. As 

James E. Dougherty, Catholic theologian and a member of forward strategists 

like Strausz-Hupe, se 

Generally speaking, the Church has always approached the problem of 
military power with circumspection. Secognizing that nowhere in the Gospel 
is military life censured, the Church is not at all sure that the meanings 
of the Scriptural passage on which the pacifists rely so heavily (e.g. 'they 
who live by the sword shall perish by it') are incontestably conclusive. 55 

Churches have their own racicals and reactionaries. While undoubtedly 

churches as a whole are influential, they are not unified, and their leaders are 

as diverse in their teachings as there are political beliefs in the country. 

Churches are generally against vhe use of military power except as a last resort. 

The same is true of our government as well as the military within car government. 

ver, churches should benefit as well as the press and educational institu- 

:n a freer flow of factual i ,if orraation. Undoubtedly they would support 

the Commission in its overall efforts toward personal liberty and greater 

individual freedom. 


o. cit ., pps. 229-251 and 88-91. 
5; Earl F. Cheii, The Business Establishment ^ p. 53. 
55herzog, op_. cit ., p. 230*. 


213 


Conclusion 

A huge military establishment., larger corporations growing bigger all 
the tins, cold war showing no sign of abatement, emerging nations enibued with 
nationalism and creating world tensions, industrialization, scientific revolution, 
bureaucratization, automation, urbanization— all are making our pluralistic 
society more complex. Senator Fulbright says, "Foreign policy in our time 
is inseparable from domestic policy. It is more accurate to think of every 
aspect of public activity as pal national oolicy." 56 President Eisenhower's 

contention that the military-i.ic . unknowingly and undaliberately 

generates pressure and influor.c- wot s i. .-oved. 

Under these conditions i . ava already been iost. It is 

an accepted theory c hat he public is entitled to be informed 

about its gi ;. An agenc) ... the .o? Kvel of government whose mission 

is to protect individual liberty and freedom by investigating and reviewing 
government policies and increasir., the flow c. information is a worthwhile 
concept. 

Still this Commission woulc b no panacee, It would not immediately correct 
all the misconceptions or areas no ding atte.-v ion which have been brought out 
in this thesis, soma of which hsve been in 01. government for years.. Still if 
the Commission operated as envisaged it would create an atmosphere of trust and 
confidence among the citizenry c: : _he country and within our democratic 
institutions of education, press, ^.nd pulpit. This appears desirable. 

No other agancy of the government could ake on this added job with the 
necessary degree of detachment end impartiality in addition to its present duties. 
The Commission would not enforce laws. As has been stated, its only directive 
power would be in establishing uniform classification standards. The 


214 


Commission would undoubtedly recommend laws for Congress to consider. If the 
laws were enacted, their enforcement would be a matter for Department of 
Justice and the courts. The mi would get assistance from and might 

-Tiend changes in the operation/, of the Bureau of the Budget, wruch 
oversees Presidential policies, puts a price t3g on them, and reviews their 
success each year as a new budg;'; s prepared* GAO, which authenticates 
defense contracts and decider .. has received full value, would 

be a source of material and stetis :ics Dmnrfssfon would not take over 
{ts job. . iion by recc ,.,. ndir.g chan. ;s 'would be influential in 
providing - us which vie. -.,-. which has been lacking in the 

past becc ■„ Likewise conditions 

requiring loss of freedom would be fully explained due to the review of the 
Commission, 

The success of the Ccnroission would depend a great deal upon the enabling 
legislation and the biggest hurtle would be getting Congress to recognize the 
need for such an agency. Place; c-j of the Cc Tiission in the hierarchy of the 
government would be as imports-; as the duties assigned. The head must be a 
. iC in order to c; a competent job, and similarly, as has been 
stated, it m^st report to both the Congress ar.d the President. It could not be 
expected that the President would have a member of the NSC who was not only 
his adviser but also whom he had not appointed. Therefore the head should be 
a political appointee, serving at the pleasure of the President and he should 
ba of the stature of a Supreme Court Ju3tice c The other members of the 
Ccranission should be appointed for staggering terms so that appointments would 
not all become vace.-..; "nistratior.. This would tend to create the 

necessary confidence by assuring the citizenry that the Commission was not a 
political instrument. This is of primary importance. 


215 


The Commission, if established, would be the means by which the nation 
becomes aware of the pressures generated by the Congressional-military-industrial 
complex so that the American goal of peace with justice could be more adequately 
served. The Convnission could be the forum which would assist the citizenry in 
President Eisenhower's words to is "unswerving in devotion to principle, con- 
fident but humble with power, di licent in pursuit of the Nation's great goals. "57 
In short the Commission would to realize America's continuing aspiration, 

"that all who yearn for free. BXf it's spiritual blessings; that 

those who have freedom will unde. s- _nd, also, -:ts heavy responsibilities. "58 


57president Eisenhower':: II Address. 

S^Loc. cit. 


APPENDIX 

Farewell Radio and Television Address to 

the American People. January 17, 1961 

(Delivered from the President's Office at 8:30 p.m.) 

Hy fellow Americans: 

Three days from now, after half a century in the service of our country, 
I shall lay down the responsibilities of office as, in traditional and solemn 
ceremony, the authority of the Presidency is vested in my successor. 

This evening I come to you with a message of leave-taking and farewell, 
and to share a few final thouoh : jith you, my countrymen. 

Like every other citizen, ' v .sh the new President, and all who will 
';abor with him, Godspeed. I pi ;h3t the coming years will be blessed 
with peace and prosperity for 

Our people expect thai.- -dent and the Congress to find essential 
seroent on issues of great .... the wise resolution of which will 
better shape the future of th- 

My own relations with the ;or jress, which began on a remote and 
tenuous basis when, long ago, o .-... ..jer of the Senate appointed me to 
V/est Point, have since ranged to the intimate during the war and imme- 
diate post-war period, and, finally, to the mutually interdependent during 
these past eight years. 

In this final relationship ■; ne Congress and the Administration have, 
on most vital issues, cooperate; well, to ser 'e the national good rather than 
mere partisanship, and so hav a business of the Nation 

should go forward. So, my offi :ial relationship with the Congress ends 
in a feeling, on my part, of gr Iti :ude that \. . have been able to dc so 
much together. 

II. 

-an years y of a century that has wit- 

nessed four major wars among it nations. "hree of these involved 
our own country. Despite these idocausts America is today the strongest, 
the most influential and most productive nation in the world. Under- 
standably proud of this pre-cmi.ierce, we yet .ealize that America's leader- 

hd, not merely upon our unmatched material progress, 
riches and military strength, but on how we u-e our power in the interests 
-,-ld peace and human betten.ient. 


217 


Throughout: America's ad. (n ."res government, our basic pur- 

poses have been to keep the peace; to foster progress in human achieve- 
ments and to enhance liberty, dignity and integrity among people ar.d 

Ions. To strive for U:;s would be unworthy of a free and re- 
ligious peopie. Any failure traceable to arrcgance, or our lack of cora- 
urehension or readiness to sacrifice would inflict upon us grievous hurt 
both at home and abroad. 

Progress toward these nob ts persistently threatened by the 
fifing the worl< „ It coranandi our whole attention, ab- 
sorbs our vary beings. We face a hostile ider logy—global in scope, 
atheistic in character, rut;., ;e, . nd insidious in method. Un- 
happily the danger it poses . -.inite duration. To 
meet it successfully, ... r . U ; C h the emotiorel and 

itory sacrii : -:cce of - ose which enable us to carry 
forward steadily, surely, ar..: : ihe burdens of a pro- 
longed and e ko. Only thus shall we 

. on . .id course toward perma- 
nent peace and heman betterr.-.- 

w<11 conti ;;r.g them, whether foreign or 

tic, great or small, there is a recurrirv temptation to feel that some 
spectacu;. stty action c< ths miraculous solution to 

i in newer elements of our de- 


;• to the road we .:o travel. 

;ach proposal must be weighed in the light of a broader considera- 
tion: the need to maintain balei.es in and among national programs- 
balance between the private end the public economy, balance between 

sst and hoped for advantage— brie nee between the clearly necessary and 
the comfortably desirable} balai.ca between our essential requirements as 
a nation and the duties imposed by the nation upon the individual; bal- 
ance between actions of the moiiKjit and the national welfare of the 
future. Good judgment seeks balance and progress; lack of it eventually 
finds imbalance and frustration,. 

The record of many decades stands as proof that our people and their 
gover: e, in the main, understood these truths and have re- 

sponded to them well, in the face of stress ar.d threat. But threats, new 
in kind or degree, constantly arise. I mention too only. 

IV. 

A '•■ -it in keeping the peace is cur military establishment. 

Our arras must be mighty, ready -. : or instant action, so that no potential 
aggressor may be tempted to risk his own destruction. 

Our military organization today bears little relation to that known 


21 8 


by any of my predecessors in pei.ceiime, or indeed by the fighting men 
o.' World War II or Korea. 

Until the latest of our world conflicts, the United States had no arma- 
rr.ents industry,, American makers of plowshares could, with time and 
as required, make swords as well. But now we can no longer risk emer- 
gency improvisation of national defense; we have been compelled to create 
a per., aments industry of vast proportions. Added to this, 
three and a he>1f million men and women are directly engaged in the de- 

. establishment. We annuaKy spend on military security more than 
the net income of all United States corporations. 

This conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large 
arms industry is new in the American-experience. The total influence— 
economic, political, even spiritual-- is felt in every city, every State house, 
every office of the Federal government. We recognize the imperative 
need for this development. Yet Me must not fail to comprehend its grave 
implications. Our toil, rescur:et and livelihood are all involved; so is the 
very structure of our society. 

In the councils of gove ist g ard against the acquisition 
of unwarranted influence c-rgiit, by the military- 

industrial complex. The po. astrous rise of misplaced 

rfli persist. 

Hon endanger our liberties 

Cake nothing for granted. Only an 
e proper meshing of the 
military machinery of defense with our peaceful 
. so that sc and liberty may prosper together. 

and largely responsible for the sweeping changes in our indus- 
trial -nil i tar y posture, has L le technological revolution during recent 
decades. 

In this revolution, research has become central; it also becomes more 
sx, and costly, A steadily increasing share is con- 
. by, or at the direction of, the Federal government. 

- solitary inventor, tinkering :n his shop, has been over- 
bed by task forces of scientists in laboratories and testing rields. In 
t|» sara i, the free university, historically the fountainhced of free 

sas and scientific discover da revolution in the conduct 

if research. Partly because or involved, a government con- 

virtualty a substiti . se for Intel lectual curiosity. For every 
old blackboard theru are now hundreds of new electronic computers. 

ati< . the natioe s scholars by Federal employ- 

;'Ior>s, and the powsr of ir. jney is ever present— and 
ravel y to be . egarded. 


219 


Yet, in holding scientific research and oiscovery in respect, as we should, 
we must also be alert to the eqial and opposit:: dancer that public policy 
could itself become the captive of a scientific-tecriological elite. 

is the task of statesmanship to mold, to balance, and to integrate 
these and other forces, new and old, within the principles of our democratic 
system—ever aiming toward the . ems goals of our free society. 

V. 

Another factor in maintaining balance involves the element of time. 
i we peer into society's future., we—you and I, and our government- 
must avoid the impulse to live only for today, plundering, for our own 

ind convenience, the precicus resources of tomorrow. We cannot mortgage 
the material assets of our grandchildren without risking the loss 
also of their political and spiritual heritage. We want democracy to 
survive for all generations to c , not to become the insolvent phantom 
of tCT.orrow. 

VI. 

Down the long lar.a of the history yet to be written America knows that 
this world of ours, ever grow .ler, must avoid becoming a com- 
munity of dreadful fear and ha be, instead, a proud confederation 
of mutual 

Sue; deration M .The weakest must come 

t0 th - -ile with tl j ao do we, protected as 

we are by our ;r.orat» economic , : rail' ength. That table, 

many past . Ions, canrot be abandoned for the 
of the battlefield 

and confidence) is a continuing 

imperatives, Together we must lear .-, how to cor nose differences, not 
v "" £n -• 'ith intellect ; «ent purpose. Because this need 

and apparent I confers that I lay down my official responsi- 
in this field with a s sense of disappointment. As one who 
id the horror and the "lingering sadness of war— as one who 
>ther war could utterly destroy this civilization which has 
been so slowly and painfully built over thousands of years— I wish I 
could say tonight that a lasting paace is in sight. 

ily, I can say that war has been avoided. Steady progress toward 
our ultimate goal has been made. But, so much remains to be done. 

a private citizen, I shall neve/ cease to do what little I can to help the 
world advance along that road. 

'II. 

lis my last good night to you as your President— I thank you 
i many opportunities you have given me far public service in war 


220 


and peace. I trust that in that service you find some things worthy; 

r the rest of it, I know ycu will find wcys to improve performance 
in the future. 

You and I--my fellow citiz: jo be strong in our faith that all 
ns, under God, will reach , of pe.-ce with justice. Hay 
we be ever unswerving in devoticr, to principle, confident but humble 
. power, diligent iti pursuit of the Nation's great goals. 

To all the peoples of the vci^d, I once r: are give expression to 
ca's prayerful and continuing aspirations 


Public Papers c- the : : ts; Cwicht 3. Eisenhower 1960-61 , pps. 1035- 
1 Qi;0. 


We pray that peoples of ali faiths, all races, all nations, may have 
their great human needs satisfi<d; that those now denied opportunity shall 
come to enjoy it to the fullj that sll who ye. Ml for freedom may ex- 
perience iis spiritual blessinc; ;hat ;ho;e I ho have freedom will under- 

. also, its heavy respor.. . . , that all who are insensitive to the 
needs of others will learn chc. : the r courges of poverty, disease 
and ignorance will be made to c tjpear from \ he earth, and that, in the 
goodness of time, all peoples v.j . coma _o live together in a peace guaran- 
teed by the binding force ^. J a respect ai d love. 


3IELI0GRAPHY 


Jooks 


Adams, Sherman, First Hand Report, New York: Harper & Row, Publishers, 1961. 

Adams, Welter, and Horace M» Grey. Monopoly in America . New York: The Mac- 
rail Ian Company, 1955. 

Allen, Frederick Lewis. The Bis Changs. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1952. 

Anderson, Ronald A. Government ess. Cincinnati: South-Western Pub- 

lishing Company, \$6ol 

Barth, Alan. Government by Inv: i York: The Viking Press, 1955. 

Sowen, Howard. Social Rsspons- :ie Businessman. New York: Harpers, 
1953. 

Boyd, Julian. Je'rerson . Princeton: Princeton Univer- 

sity Press, ',950, 

Brennan, Donald G., editor. Arr.s Control, Disarmament, and National Security . 

i . ,'i. 

Brodie^ lissile Age . Princeton: Princeton Univer- 

sity Press, 1959. 

Brow... ... Generals and 1 he. Publ ic: Recent Policymaking in Civil Military 

, Laurence, Kansas" University of Kansas Publications, 196<u 

Brownlow, Lcuis, and Charles S. Ascher. Less Government or More . Chicago: 
American Library Associaticr., 1933. 

: Free Enterprise . New York: McGraw-Hill 
Book Company, 19&57 

Burnham, James. The Managerial fie . lutior, , N w York: Van Rees Press, 19^1. 

Burns, James MacGregor, and Jac! Walter Pel U. on. Government by ti-,a People . 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1963. 

Burns, James MacGregor. The _ m ecy. Englewood Cliffs, New 

Jersey: Prentice Hall, Inc.," 4903. 

Cater, Douglc^s. Pcver in V/ash: nr -^on. New York: Random House, 196^. 

. Vh3 Fourth Branch of G overnment, Boston: Houghton-Mifflin Co., 1959. 

Chamberlain, John. The Enterprisi ng Americans . New York: Harper & Row, 1963. 

Cheit, E2r1 r<,, editor. The Bu siness Establis hment. New York: John Wiley & Sons 
Inc., 1961*. 


222 


Coffin, Tristram. The Passion of the Hawks, New York: Macmillan Company, 1964. 

Cook, Fred J. The Warfare State . Mew York: The Macmillan Company, 1962. 

Corwin, Edward S. The President : Office and Powers . New York: New York Uni- 
veristy Press, 1957. 

• Total War and the Constitution . New York: A. A. Knopf, 1947. 

:ter, Cornelius P. Government, and Free Enterprise , New York: Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston, I960. 

Editors of the Wall Street Journal . The New Millionaires and How They Made Their 
Fortunes. New York: Berna.-c Gels associates, 1961. 

- 
usenhower, Dwight 0. Mandate For Change . New York: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 
1963. 

Finer, S. E. The Han On Horses; sk„ London: Pall Matl Press, 1962. 

Gal braith, John Ken.. meric^n Capitalism . Boston: Houghton-Mifflin Com- 

pany, 1952. 

Goldwater, Barry. Co-science 0',' a Cons ervative. Shepherdsville, Kentucky: 
Victor Publishing Company, Inc.^ ijoO. 

• Why Not Victory . New York: McGraw-Hill Publishing Company, Inc., 1962. 

Griffin, Clare E. Enterprise in a Free Society . Chicago: Richard D. Irwin, Inc., 

Herring, E »rd Pendleton. The Impact of War. New York: Farrar & Rinehart. 
Inc., U . 

Herzog, Arthur. The War-Peace Esf.. bHshjnent » New York: Harper & Row, I963. 

Hitch, C ,, and Roland N. McKean. The Economics of Defense in the Nu- 

clear Age. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 19o"o". 

igton, Samuel P. The Commc n Defense . New York: Columbia University Press. 
1961. 

.• The Sdldiler and the State . Cambridge: The Belknap Press of the Harvard 


University Press, 1957. 

Janowicz, Morris. The Professional Soldier . New York: The Free Press of Glen- 
coe, Illinois, T9B0. 




-uclear War. Princetons Princeton University Press. 
I960. 

merer, Donald L., and C. Clyde Jones. American Economic History . New York- 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, Ir.c., 1959. 


223 


Kissinger, Henry, necessity fo; - C hoice . New York: Harper & Brothers, I960. 

:, Fletcher, and Charles E;.iley. Seven Days in May. New York: Harper 
& Row, 1962. 

Lasswell, Harold 0. National Security and Individual Freedom . New York: 
McGraw-Hill Book Company, fncT, 1950. 

Lecky, William Hartpoie. A His L of En olan I in the Eighteenth Century . Vol. 
I. Hew York: D. Appleton :oii iany., f8&'3* 

Levine, Robert A. The Arms D;..' New York: Columbia University Press, 1961. 


.yons. Gene M. and John W. Has" : atfon and Military Leadership : A 
Study of a.O.T.C , Princeton Prl . -iversity Press, 1959. 


MacLcan, Joan Coyne (editor). r -/"dent and ,'cngress: The Conflict of Powers . 
1 York: H. W. Wilsc;-. . 




Kasland John V. 1 ., and Laurenc Iwa . So] Vers and Scholars, Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 

Matthews, Donald R. The Social or Political Decision Makers , Garden 

City: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1955. 

Miller, r ; Kistt :he United States . New York: George Bra- 

zlller, S3. 

Harvey C« - c , J itein. Arms and the State . New 
eth Century .953. 

iter. Ind; die C ommon Man . New York: The Fund 

for the Republic, 1957. 

Mills, C. Wright. The Causes < ee«. New York: BaTUntine Books. 

Inc., 1961. 

. The P ower Elite . New York: Oxford University Press, 1956. 


Morris, Richard B. Encyclopedi a > f African ii story . New York: Harper & Broth- 
ers, 1953. 

Neustadt, Richard. Presidentia l r ower . New .'ork: John Wiley 5 Sons, Inc., I960. 

Nixon, Richard M. '"-.e Challenc ^s Wa Face . lew York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 

Disc,-., editor). Ameri c :. As A Mass Sc =iety . New York: The Free Press of 
Glencce., I963. ~ 

ad, Robert E. Limited Warfare. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1957. 

Raymond, Jack. Power At The P; •:. gon. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 196*t. 




224 


Reed, Edward (editor). Challenges To Democracy ; The Next Ten Years . New York: 
Frederick A. Praeger, 1963. 

Ridgway, Katthew a. Soldier , The Memoirs of Matthew j3. Ridgway as told to Harold 
H. Martin. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1956. 

John C. The Man agement of Defense . Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 

1964. 

Jews and Substance . New York: The Macraillan Company, 1964. 

I, Arnold A., and Harold D. Lasswell. Pov^r, Corruption and Rectitude . 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 19&3. 

Ropke, Willi an. Economics of the Free Society . Chicago: Henry Regenery Com- 
pany, 1963. 

Rosenfarb, Joseph. Freedom and the Administrative State . New York: Harper & 
Brothers, 1943. 

Rostov), W. W. United States j_n the World Arena. New York: Harper & Row, 
Publishers/T960. 

,j Hobart. The Free Enterpri sers; Kennedy , Johnson and the Business Estab- 
lishment. New York: G„ T. Putnam Sons, 3964. 

Sapin, Burton M. and Richard C. Snyder. The tele of the Military in American 
Foreign Policy, Garden City: Doubleday 5 Company, Inc., 1954. 

Snow, C. P. T :-.a Second look . New York: The Hew American 

Library or WorJd Literature, nc« "1963. 

Smith, Adam. ; i Wealth of K'a s. Chicago: A Gateway Edition, Henry Regenery 

Company, 1953". 

Snyder, Earl. Ca pitalism the Cre ator: The E conomic Foundations c: Modern In- 
dustriai Society . New York: Macmillan Company, 1940. 

cy, John M., Jr. The Military Establishment . Boston: Beacon Press, 1964. 

Taylor, Ms»Jell 0. The Uncerta in Trumpet . Mew York: Harper & Brothers, Pub- 
lishers, 1959. 

rica's Futu re. Report of the Twenty-Sixth American Assembly. 
N© Arden House, 1964T 

Truman, Harry S. Memoirs by_ Harry S. Truman.,, Vol . I_: The Year of Decision , Vol . 

"Ho-'o. " "Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Company, 
1956. 

Tugwell, Rexford G. The Enlargement of the Presidency . New York: Doubleday 
& Company, I960. 


225 


Vagts, Alfred. A History of Mil tar Ism . United States: Meridian Books, Inc., 
1959. 

Watson, Thomas J. Jr., A Busines: and Its Beliefs . New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1963. 

Wiggins, James Russell. Freedom or Secrecy . New York: Oxford University Press, 
' 1956. 

Wise, David, and Thomas B. Ross. The Invisible Government . New York: Random 
House, 1964. 

ac. New York: New Voi-i; World Telegram and Sun, 1964. 

Articles 

Also?, Stewart. "Communism: Tr . waning of >,hange." Saturday Evening Post , 
December 5, 1964, p. 12. 

Baldwin, Hanson W. "Slow Down ii - Pentagon," Foreign Affairs , Vol. 43, 
January 19&5, pp. 262-280. 

. ■■ Move In." Harper's fc gazine, December 1947, pp. 481-489. 

Barber, Arthur. "Mergers - Threat to Free Enterprise," Challenge , March 1963, 

izen, The Soldier, The Policy Maker," Background , Vol. 8, 
August 1564, pp. 79-86. 




Bergson, Abrara. "The Great Economic Race," challenge, March 1963, pp. 4-6. 

Fran!; H. "The Three Great Callings," The Educational Record , American 
Counc il of Education, July I960, pp. 203-.--07. 

Cauley, John R. "Peace Pledge by _. B. J.," Kansas City Star , December 17, 1963, 
pp. 1, 6. 

Collins, General James F. "The Army in the Pacific Area," Army , December 1963, 
pp. 60-62, 86-87. 


Deutschman, Paul. "United Fru-; :»s Experiment in International Partnership," 
Readers Digest , October 196'+, ?p. 146-150, 

Douglas .. 0. "Should We Fear the Military?", Look , March 11, 1952, pp. 

34-36. 

ius. "Arms and the 3ig Money Men," Harper's Magazine , March 1964, 

pp.: 


226 


_. "The Costly Mysteries of Defense Spending," Harper's Magazine. 


April 1964, pp. 61-65. 
. "The Disarmament Blues," Harper's M agazine , May 1964, pp. 56-62. 


Eisenhov:er, Dwight D. "Let's Be Honest With Ourselves," Saturday Evening Post , 
October 19, 1963, pp. 23-24, October 26, 5963, pp. 26-27. 

Fenno, Richard, "(tow Is The Tiri "or Cabinet Makers," New York Tines Magazine, 
November 20, I960, pp. 12, 88-94. 

iiin T. R. "Civilian Soldiers and American Military Policy," World 
Politics , April 1955, pp. 402-418. 

Ginsburgh, Colonel Robert N. "The Challenges to Military Professionalism," 
Air Forca and Space Digest , March 1964, pp. 50-56. 

Juelzo, Major Carl M. "In Defer.se of an Elusive Ideal," Army, July 1964, pp. 

62-65. 

Hacker, Andrew. "Do Corpo;- e a Social Duty," New York Times Magazine , 
November 17, 1963, pp. 21, i.6-118. 

Hall, Clarence W. "The Country That Saved Itself," Readers Digest , December 
1964, pp. 135 . ~ 

Hawkes, Russell. 'DOD Official Ureas Industry to Consider Non-Defense Markets," 
Missiles ts, December 23, 1963, pp. 16-17. 

Hitch, Charles J. "National Policy as a Field for Economics Research," World 
Pc; April 1960, pp. 434.-:4S. 

Hubball, John G. "Tough Torniy Powar-Our Daterrent-In-Chief," Readers Digest , 
y 1964, pp. 71-76. — 

^Huntington, Samuel P. "Civilia: C ntrol and the Constitution," Amarican 
e Review , Vol, 50, September 1956, pp. 676-699. 

dney. "Cabinet Makers' Job as Eisenhower Sees It," New York Times 
Magarfne, July 20, 1958, pp. 7, 38-41. 

"To Ease the Burden of the Presidency," New York Times Magazine, March 


23, 1958, pp. 27, 96-98. 

t hart no. "Congressmen-- Retired Officers Termed Sources of Pressure,' 
Aviation Week, Aug. 17, 1959, p. 32. 


; Defends Officers in Industry Against Congressional Attacks," 


Aviat-k- Week, July 13, 1959, p. 35. 

f . "New Bomber Funds Win Early Approval," Aviation Week, February 24, 
?964, pp. 26-27. 


227 


Kane, Colonel Francis X. "Security is ioo Important to be Left to Computers," 
Fortune , April 1964, pp. 14o-147, 231-236. 

2trick, James J. "Fair Trial - Free Press Conflict Can't 3e Fuliy Solved," 
!'cn?cs City Star , February 25, 19o5, p. 24. 

Lawrence, David. "If - - -," U. S_ Nei-.r, and V' arld Report , October 21, 1963, 
p. 124. 

Ltppman, Walter, "What Inatc. Fansa Spending?" Kansas City Times, December 
16, 1963, p. 22. 

Marshall, S. L. A. "Why Do They SU.nder Our Military Men," Post , September 5, 
1964, pp. 6-8. 

Morton, Louis. "Historia Mer :," World Politics , January I960, pp. 

155-164. 

Moses, Robert. "Mr. Moses Examine 'Conflict of Interest'," New York Times 
Magazine , July 23, 1961, pp. --13, 26-27. 

Neustadt, Richard. "The Preside: at Mid-Century," Law and Contemporary Prob- 
lems , Autumn 1956. 

Radway, Laurence. "Uniforms ano M if ti : What Place in Policy?" Public Adminis- 
tration Revie-.,' , 1953, pp. l£o-i85. 

Ross, Irwin "Congressmen and Their Conflicting Interests," The Readers Digest , 
July 1964, pp. 118-523. 

Schl.. ,;hur M«, "Milita:;' "orce: How Much and Where?", The Reporter , 

August 4, 1953, pp. 12-16. 

Smith; n. "The $7-Biclion Contract That Changed The Rules," 

Fortune, Harch 1963, pp. 96-10;, 182-138. 

Sulzberger, C. L. "When the Pope wes Infallible," New York Times, May 16, 1948, 
p. 34. 

Taylor, Maxwell D. "What Really Takes Place in the Pentagon Engine Room," 
Army-Navy-Air Force Journal and Register , February 29, 1964. 

"The Military Lobby - Its Impact: on Congress, Nation," Congressional Quarterly , 
March 24, I96I, pp. 463-477. 

Periodicals and Scholastic Journals 

ower. July 1964-Karch 1965. 
American Economic Review . January 1964-Karch 1965. 


•jean Journal of Economics ar d i ocioTogy , 1 964. 

ic_a_1_ Science Revie w, January 1959-April 1965. 
:an Sociological Review . January 1964-April I965. 
Army Information Digest . July ISoWlarch 1965. 
Army Time*. July 1964-March 1965. 
Aviation Week . July 1964-March 1 965, 

;tin of Atomic Scientists . January 1964-A?ri1 1965. 
, Business Week. July 1964-March 1955. 
Journal of the Armed Forces . July 1964-March '965. 
Journal of Politics , January l?62-HoVeraber 1964. 
Kansas City Star . July 1964-Karch "965. 
Kansas City Times . July \$C .965. 

Military Review . July 196Wian:-. .965,, 
Missiles and Ro ckets. July lS6*)~March 1965. 

:. July 1964-March 1965. 
New York ?■:...;■;. July 1964-March 1965. 
Politics! Sc-^.-.c a Quarterly . January 1 961 -March 1965. 
Public O' viniofi Quarterly . January 1961-Karch 1965. 
Seview of Politics. January 1961-January 1965. 
-, Time . July 1964=Harch 1 965. 
j. U. S „ World Report . July 1964-March 1965. 

ern Political Quarterly . Jtnuary 1961-Jas.uary 1965. 
> i.' orld Politics . January 1961-J<nu:!ry 1965. 

Goverr.-.enc Publications 

- fo r Comm?] ders, Number 130 . United States 
Air Force. Washington, 0. C, April 1964. 


229 


AHF Army News Features, Officer s Achieve Impr essive Gains in Degrees Held . 
Department of the Army, November 167" 190**. 

S2£» Fiscal Year Ending June 3£, 1965 . 
Vfes'hingtcn, D. C, U. S. Government Printing Office, 19o4, p. 357. 

Department of the Army. U. £. Prm" and Nation al Security . Washington, D. C. 
U, S. Government Printing Office, '.162, pi 71. 

;1 Security Seminar, Pres tion C utlir .^s and Reading List . Washington, 
0. C, Industrial College of Forces., 196'*. 

,-ninar Pros .cius, 196^— 6£ . Washington, 0. C, Industrial 
College of the Armed Forces, "■.Ja'-t, 

Office of the Chief of Military History, Department of the Army, Washington, D. 

C, S; ns : U. £. Military L; ;ders, May 10, 1955. 

1 Hii JM ite;:-j lican Party, 1964 . Washington, 

D. C, U. - S. Government Printing Office, i3"6"5I 

1 ght D. EU^nhower, 1960-61 . Washington, D. 
C, Gov" -j Office, l5Sl7 PP« '"035-1 O 1 * * 

Rowen, Henry. "Nationol nd the American Economy in the 1960's, Study 

Committ ee. 86th Cong., 2d Sess., Washington, 

o. c .i, .960. 

ionai Security and Peace . Washington, 
0. C. ._'.. Ordnance." fcion. January 19&5. 

k You , Air Force, Washington, 0. C, 1963. 

U„ S. Array Troop Support Unit. sletter, I: sue No.' 2, August 20, 1963. 

U. S. Congr 1 Record. VoU .07, Part It (14395-1^398, 14433-14439) and 

"Part 12 CfiKGr^fSlM). 87th Cjng., 1st Sess., 1961. 

U. S. Department of Commerce,, oric -1 Stucies of the United States: Colonial 

[957. Washi ngton," b'J C, U. S. Government Printing Office, 1958, 
p. 793. 

U. £. Gove rnment Organizational Ma nual . General Service Administration, Office 
of the Federal Register, National Archives and Record Office. Washington, D. 
C, U. S, Government Printing Office, 1961s, pp. 535-536. 

U, So Houce of Representatives. Subcommittee No. 3 and Committee on Armed 

Services. Hea rings on Rcae,-va Officers Training Corps Program . 88th Cong., 
1st Sess., T9o3l 




230 


LI. S. House of Representatives,, S ubcoimrf ttee of the Committee on Appropria- 
tions. Hearings on Pep:: of Defense Appropriations for 19u>. 88th Cong,, 
2d Sess., 1964, pp. 464-517. 

use of Representatives. . :tee for Special Investigations of 

the Committee on Armed Service;. Hcari nqs on Empl oyment of Ret- i red Mi 1 i tary 
and Civilian Personnel by Defe.se Industrie s. u6th Cong., 1st Sess., 1959. 

U. S. House of Representatives. Subcommittee for Special Investigations of 

the Committee on Armed Services. Hearings on Empl oyment of Reti red and Mili- 
tary and Civilian Personnel by Defense Industries. d7th Cong., 1st Sess., 1962. 

U. S. Senate. Re port of the Speci.-.l Committee on Investigation of the Munitions 
Committee . 74th Cong., 2d Sess., 1936'. 

L). S. Senate. Subcc ial Policy Machinery of the Committee on 

Government Operations. Ha. on 0rga;i: nation for National Security . Vol. 

1, Hearings, Vol. 2, Hearings end Backgroi/od Material, Vol. 3, Staff Reports 
and Recommendations., 196'i. 

U. S- Senate. Subcommittee o .a': Security Staffing and Operations of the 

Committee on Gov... .is. Stud-, on the Basic Issues of Administra- 

tion of rational Security . 38 h Cong., 1st Sess., 1963. 

U. S. Senate. Subcommittee or. . . .'reparedness of the Committee of Armed 

Services. Heroines on MiHt; r Cold War E ducation and Speech Revi ew Policies . 
87th Cong., 2d Sess., 1SS5T 

U. Si Sen .... on . ;: ."repare iness of the Committee of Armed 

ieport on i -.: ■ :old War Education and Speech Revi ew Policies . 

87th 2d~Sess., 1962. "" 

id . Industrie; College of the Armed Forces. Washington, 
D. C, 1964. 


MILITARY-INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX! EISENHOWER'S UNSOLVED PROBLEM 


THOMAS JENKINS BADGER 
B. A., George Washington University, 19<*9 


AN ABSTRACT Of A MASTER'S THESIS 


submitted In partiet fulfillment of the 


requirements for the degree 


MASTER OF ARTS 


Department of Political Sd 


KANSAS STATE UNIVERSITY 
Manhattan, Kansas 

1965 


Reminiscent of George Washington, President Elsenhower chose to ask* a 
farewell address. No platform Is more prestigious nor more Influential than 
that of the President of the United States. Ho words should or do receive 
more analysis. A farewell address only increased the natural Interest in the 
President's words, because of the added hope that his eight years' experience 
would bring forth the distilled wisdom he had obtained, to chart a course for 
the future of the nation he had led with such dedication. 

In one portion of this speech the President coined a new phrase— 'Military- 
Industrial complex". Ho made four points about this complex! (1) It was Inmense, 
and it was imperative for the security of the free world) (2) its Influence was 
being folt In every structure of our society— economic, political, and even spiri- 
tual) (3) It has a potential for misplaced power that exists and will persist) 
CO and only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing 
of the complex so that security and liberty may prosper together* The President's 
words added up to a warning against potential militarism. The subject was not new. 
Several prominent man and scholars had written about the effects of the cold wsr, 
with emphasis placed on the combined effect of increased military Influence in 
all phases of American life and of the industrial base which supported this 
new military power* The report of the Nye Committee, which was partially respon- 
sible for the neutrality of the United States In the late thirties prior to 
World War II, had not been entirely forgotten. The President's words only 
emphasized a condition suspected by many but they were particularly important 
because, he, of all men, had shown particular trust, respect, and understanding 
to the American military and industrial leaders* He owed his success to these 
two spheres of American life* 

The purpose of this thesis Is to discuss the reasons behind the President's 
charge, to determine whether his statement was justified, and to ascertain to 


what degree thl* complex repre»ents a threat to Individual liberties and free- 
dom and to the democratic processes of the United States. 

The thesis attempts to analyze the President's words and actions whit* In 
office and, simultaneously, Ms words regarding the complex since his retire- 
ment. The Congressional Record and Congressional Quarterly have been used to 
find out what Congress has said on this and related subjects. The words of 
military scholars and industrial economists and other social scientists have 
also been studied. As the subject Is a current one and the president had 
specifically said the danger was potential* the New York Times. Kansas City Star 
and Times. Hei aw oo k . U. S. News and World Report and Time Magazine have bean read 
dally or weekly during 1964, as the case may be, and the material evaluated. To 
get the viewpoint of the military and industry, each Issue of The Journal of the 
Armed Forces, Army. Alrpower, Aviation Week, Business week, and Missiles and Rockets 
have been reviewed for the same period. Additional trade and scholarly magazines 
have also been consulted. 

The findings agree with those of President Eisenhower, but not with his 
recommendation. The thesis concludes that the military-Industrial complex Is not 
consciously operational, and that its power lies In public apathy, In lack of 
public information, and in the creeping erosion of its appearance. However, 
there are Inherent safeguards against this phenomenon. On the other hand, the 
potential danger is greatly Increased by its alliance with Congress. And, most 
important, some liberties and freedoms have already been lost due to Its existence. 

The Eisenhower recommendation of an alert and knowledgeable citizenry is 
unobtainable under our present political system and methods of government operation. 
The needed information prior to the decision Is not available for the public to 
become knowledgeable. Decisions on defense must be taken for the most part on 
faith and trust. The executive branch, which includes the military, plus the 
legislative branch, and industry combine to increase secrecy, and information 


from all throe is given to the public only from the viewpoint of their self- 
interest. 

A countervailing power Is needed that will work toward Informing the elec- 
torate and promote public and national debate. This countervailing power must 
have the support of Congress, the executive branch, and the press. A solution 
with modifications as first outlined by Or. H. 0. Lssswatl In his book. 
National Security and Individual Freedom, is recommended. 

